>>> 解深密經
Saṃdhinirmocana Sūtra
<<< Chapter 1 - Introduction  序
>>> 序品第一
Chapter One - Introduction

如是我聞：
<<< Thus have I heard:
>>> 一時，薄伽梵住最勝光曜七寶莊嚴，放大光明，普照一切無邊世界，無量方所妙飾間列，周圓無際，其量難測，超過三界所行之處，勝出世間善根所起，最極自在淨識為相。如來所都，諸大菩薩眾所雲集，無量天、龍、藥叉、健達縛、阿素洛、揭路茶、緊捺洛、牟呼洛伽、人、非人等，常所翼從，廣大法味喜樂所持，作諸眾生一切義利，滅諸煩惱災橫纏垢，遠離眾魔、過諸莊嚴，如來莊嚴之所依處，大念、慧、行以為遊路，大止妙觀以為所乘，大空、無相、無願解脫為所入門，無量功德眾所莊嚴，大寶花王眾所建立大宮殿中。
<<< One time, the Bhagavān was abiding in an utterly radiant palace, adorned with the seven treasures, wherein a great light illuminated universally boundless world-systems, beautiful and arranged marvelously throughout immeasurable directions, totally, completely, limitlessly, their measure difficult to calculate, transcending anything found in the Triple Realm, having supremely left the world by [way of] virtuous roots. A most extremely sovereign pure consciousness was the [only] characteristic. In such a domain of the Thus Come One, all the great bodhisattvas gather together like clouds, immeasurable devas, nagas, yaksas, gandharavas, asuras, garudas, kimnaras, mahoragas, humans, nonhumans, and all others, forever ‘birds of a feather’, the flavor of the broad, great Dharma sustaining their joy and delight, bringing about benefit for all sentient beings, putting an end to oppressive afflictions and restricting defilements, escaping the hordes of Mara, and surpassing all [worldly] adornments. Wherever there are such adornments of the Thus Come One, the practices of great Mindfulness (smrti) and Wisdom (prajna) are the pathways. Great Stopping (samatha) and subtle Observation (vipasyana) are the vehicles. Liberation by great Emptiness, Characteristiclessness, and Wishlessness are the gateways, [all] decorated by immeasurable virtues, created by the gathering of the Great Jewel Flower King.
>>> 是薄伽梵最清淨覺，不二現行，趣無相法。住於佛住逮得一切佛平等性，到無障處，不可轉法，所行無礙，其所成立不可思議。遊於三世平等法性，其身流布一切世界，於一切法智無疑滯，於一切行成就大覺，於諸法智無有疑惑，凡所現身不可分別，一切菩薩正所求智，得佛無二住勝彼岸，不相間雜。如來解脫妙智究竟，證無中邊佛地平等，極於法界，盡虛空性窮未來際。
<<< This Bhagavān was supremely, purely enlightened, manifesting a non-dual practice that brings about the Characteristicless Dharma. Abiding in the Abode of Buddha where the equal nature of all buddhas is realized, arriving where there are no hindrances, [where] the irreversible Dharma is practiced without obstruction, that which he established is inconceivable. Roaming throughout the equanimous dharmic nature of Triple World, his body saturates all worlds. By doubtless, unblocked knowledge of every dharma, by the perfect accomplishment of every practice, with undeluded, doubtless knowledge of all dharmas that manifests un-differentiate-able bodies, the knowledge bodhisattvas correctly seek, that victorious far shore of the Buddha’s nondual abode was attained, without the mixing-up of characteristics. The subtle knowledge of the liberation of the Thus Come One having been fulfilled, the equality of all Buddha lands (’stages’ or ‘grounds) without middle or extremes is realized, reaching the ultimate extent of the Dharmadhatu, exhausting [even] the nature of space, never coming to an end.
>>> 與無量大聲聞眾俱，一切調順，皆是佛子，心善解脫，慧善解脫，戒善清淨，趣求法樂；多聞、聞持，其聞積集；善思所思，善說所說，善作所作；捷慧、速慧、利慧、出慧、勝決擇慧、大慧、廣慧、及無等慧，慧寶成就；具足三明，逮得第一現法樂住；大淨福田，威儀寂靜，無不圓滿；大忍柔和，成就無減，已善奉行如來聖教。
<<< Also gathered was an immeasurable number of great Voice-Hearers, each one disciplined [subdued], all children of the Buddha, well liberated in mind, well liberated in wisdom, well purified in discipline, ever seeking Dharma Joy. Having heard much, having retained what they heard, their learning was well gathered. Their thoughts were good thoughts, their speech was good speech, and their actions were good actions. Swift wisdom, quick wisdom, beneficial wisdom, ‘far out’ wisdom, honorable wisdom, great wisdom, and equanimous wisdom, perfected wisdom jewels; endowed with the Three Knowledges [trividyā - *1. remembering former lives, 2. divine eye of the future, and 3. present knowing of the destruction of contaminants], having arrived at the foremost state of abiding in Dharma Joy; great, pure fields of merit; perfect in their comportment, with nothing unfulfilled; their great patience (ksanti*) and gentleness complete and unceasing, having already revered and practiced the sagely teachings of the Thus Come One.
>>> 復有無量菩薩摩訶薩，從種種佛土而來集會。皆住大乘，遊大乘法，於諸眾生其心平等，離諸分別及不分別種種分別，摧伏一切眾魔怨敵，遠離一切聲聞、獨覺所有作意，廣大法味喜樂所持，超五怖畏，一向趣入不退轉地，息一切眾生一切苦惱所逼迫地，而現在前。其名曰：解甚深義密意菩薩摩訶薩、如理請問菩薩摩訶薩、法涌菩薩摩訶薩、善清淨慧菩薩摩訶薩、廣慧菩薩摩訶薩、德本菩薩摩訶薩、勝義生菩薩摩訶薩、觀自在菩薩摩訶薩、慈氏菩薩摩訶薩、曼殊室利菩薩摩訶薩等，而為上首。
<<< There were also immeasurable numbers of bodhisattva mahasattvas, having come from various Buddha lands. They all abided in the Great Vehicle, traveling [in] the Dharma of the Great Vehicle, their minds equanimous toward all sentient beings, free from discriminating and/or not discriminating the various kinds of discriminations, conquering all the enmity of hordes of Maras, going beyond the minds of all Voice Hearers and the Solitary Awakened, sustained by the joy of the flavor of the broad, great Dharma, transcending the Five Dreads, destined to enter the non-regressing stage, where the stressful stages of all sentient beings and all afflictions appearing before them are calmed. Their names were: Revealing the Secret Meaning of the Most Profound Bodhisattva Mahasattva (Gambhirarthasamdhinirmocana), Logical Questioner Bodhisattva Mahasattva (Vidhivatpariprcchaka), Born of the Dharma Bodhisattva Mahasattva (Dharmodgata), Well Purified Intellect Bodhisattva Mahasattva (Suvisuddhimati), Vast Intellect Bodhisattva Mahasattva (Viśālamati), Root of Virtue Bodhisattva Mahasattva (Guņākara), Born of the Ultimate Truth Bodhisattva Mahasattva (Paramārthasamudgata), the noble Sovereign that Observes Bodhisattva Mahasattva (Avalokiteśvara), the Compassionate Bodhisattva Mahasattva (Maitreya), Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva Mahasattva, and so on, as their chiefs.
>>> 爾時，如理請問菩薩摩訶薩，即於佛前問解甚深義密意菩薩言：「最勝子！言一切法無二，一切法無二者，何等一切法？云何為無二？」
<<< PART ONE - Logical Questioner and Revealing the Secret Meaning
>>> 解甚深義密意菩薩告如理請問菩薩曰：「善男子！一切法者，略有二種：一者、有為；二者、無為。是中有為，非有為非無為；無為，亦非無為非有為。」
<<< At that time, Vidhivatpariprcchaka (’Logical Questioner’) Bodhisattva mahasattva, standing before the Buddha, questioned Gambhirārthasamdhinirmocana (’Revealing the Secret Meaning’) Bodhisattva mahasattva saying, “Jinaputra (’Child of the Victor’)! When it is said all dharmas are nondual, what are ‘all dharmas’ (sarva-dharma), and what is called nondual (advaya)?”
>>> 如理請問菩薩復問解甚深義密意菩薩言：「最勝子！如何有為，非有為非無為；無為，亦非無為非有為？」
<<< Gambhirārthasamdhinirmocana Bodhisattva replied to Vidhivatpariprcchaka Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! ‘In general, all dharmas’ are of two kinds: 1, conditioned (saṃskṛta) and 2, unconditioned (asaṃskṛta). Within this, **the conditioned is neither conditioned nor unconditioned; and the unconditioned is also neither unconditioned nor conditioned.
>>> 解甚深義密意菩薩謂如理請問菩薩曰：「善男子！言有為者，乃是本師假施設句。若是本師假施設句，即是遍計所集、言辭所說；若是遍計所集、言辭所說，即是究竟種種遍計言辭所說。不成實故，非是有為。善男子！言無為者，亦墮言辭。設離有為、無為少有所說，其相亦爾。然非無事而有所說。何等為事？謂諸聖者以聖智、聖見，離名言故，現等正覺；即於如是離言法性，為欲令他現等覺故，假立名想謂之有為。
<<< Vidhivatpariprcchaka Bodhisattva further questioned Gambhirārthasamdhinirmocana Bodhisattva mahasattva saying, “Jinaputra! How is it that the conditioned is neither conditioned nor unconditioned, and the unconditioned, too, is neither unconditioned nor conditioned?”
>>> 「善男子！言無為者，亦是本師假施設句；若是本師假施設句，即是遍計所集、言辭所說；若是遍計所集、言辭所說，即是究竟種種遍計言辭所說。不成實故，非是無為。善男子！言有為者，亦墮言辭。設離無為、有為少有所說，其相亦爾。然非無事而有所說。何等為事？謂諸聖者以聖智、聖見，離名言故，現等正覺；即於如是離言法性，為欲令他現等覺故，假立名想謂之無為。」
<<< Gambhirārthasamdhinirmocana Bodhisattva said to Vidhivatpariprcchaka Bodhisattva, “Kulaputra! When ‘the conditioned’ is spoken of, this is just a conventional term employed by the Original Teacher. Since this is just a conventional term employed by the Original Teacher, it is just an accumulation of mental fabrications (parikalpa), some word that was said. Since this is just an accumulation of mental fabrications, some word that was said, then it is ultimately just all kinds of accumulations of mental fabrications of words that are said. Because it is completely not real, then it is unconditioned. Kulaputra! When ‘the unconditioned’ is spoken of, this is also just a conventional term. Even if something were said to be beyond the conditioned and unconditioned, it too would be characterized as such [i.e. as just a conventional term]. That does not mean, however, that there’s nothing going on [非無事]. What’s going on [為事]? What is known as the wisdom of all sages, the vision of sages, is beyond names and speech, and manifests as correct enlightenment. The nature of the Dharma is also beyond speech like this. It is because they desire for others to manifest correct enlightenment that they employ names to perceive what is known as the conditioned.”
>>>  “Kulaputra! When ‘the unconditioned’ is spoken of, this is also just a conventional term employed by the Original Teacher. Since this is just a conventional term employed by the Original Teacher, it is just an accumulation of mental fabrications (parikalpa), some word that was said. Since this is just an accumulation of mental fabrications, some word that was said, then it is ultimately just all kinds of accumulations of mental fabrications of words that are said. Because it is completely not real, then it is unconditioned. Kulaputra! When ‘the conditioned’ is spoken of, this is also just a conventional term. Even if something were said to be beyond the unconditioned and the conditioned, it would also be characterized as such [i.e. as just a conventional term]. That does not mean, however, that there’s nothing going on. What’s going on? What is known as the wisdom of all sages, the vision of sages, is beyond names and speech, manifest as correct enlightenment. The nature of the Dharma also being beyond speech like this, it is because they desire for others to manifest correct enlightenment that they employ names to perceive what is known as the unconditioned.”

爾時，如理請問菩薩摩訶薩復問解甚深義密意菩薩摩訶薩言：「最勝子！如何此事彼諸聖者以聖智、聖見，離名言故，現等正覺；即於如是離言法性，為欲令他現等覺故，假立名想，或謂有為？或謂無為？」
<<< Then, Vidhivatpariprcchaka Bodhisattva further questioned Gambhirārthasamdhinirmocana Bodhisattva saying, “Jinaputra! Why do the wise, of wise vision, being beyond names and speech, manifesting correct enlightenment, and the nature of the Dharma also being beyond speech like this, desiring for others to manifest correct enlightenment, employ names to perceive what are called the conditioned and the unconditioned?”
>>> 解甚深義密意菩薩謂如理請問菩薩曰：「善男子！如善幻師或彼弟子，住四衢道，積集瓦、礫、草、葉、木等，現作種種幻化事業。所謂：象身、馬身、車身、步身，末尼、真珠、琉璃、螺貝、璧玉、珊瑚，種種財、穀、庫藏等身。若諸眾生愚癡、頑鈍、惡慧種類，無所曉知，於瓦、礫、草、葉、木等上諸幻化事，見已聞已，作如是念：『此所見者，實有象身、實有馬身、車身、步身，末尼、真珠、琉璃、螺貝、璧玉、珊瑚，種種財、穀、庫藏等身。』如其所見，如其所聞，堅固執著，隨起言說：『唯此諦實，餘皆愚妄。』彼於後時應更觀察。」
<<< Gambhirārthasamdhinirmocana Bodhisattva said to Vidhivatpariprcchaka Bodhisattva, “Kulaputra! It’s like a skilled magician with an assistant who gathers together tiles, shards, grass, leaves, and wood at the intersection of four paths and who creates all kinds of illusory things [’goings ons’ 事業] such as: the bodies of elephants, horses, carts, soldiers, maṇi jewels, true pearls, lapis lazuli, conch shells, precious jade, rare coral, and all kinds of various goods, grain, veritable treasuries of such things. All the ignorant and stupid sentient beings, dull witted, the kinds with bad intellect, without the slightest bit of knowledge. When they see and hear of these illusory things made of tiles, shards, grass, leaves, and wood they think, ‘This, what I am seeing, is really an elephant, really a horse, cart, soldiers, maṇi jewels, true pearls, lapis lazuli, conch shells, precious jade, rare coral, and all kinds of various goods, grain, veritable treasuries of such things.’ Thus, they steadfastly cling to what they see and what they hear of, and go on to say, ‘Only this is real, everything else is delusion.’ Afterward they need to observe things more carefully.”
>>> 「若有眾生非愚、非鈍、善慧種類，有所曉知，於瓦、礫、草、葉、木等上諸幻化事，見已聞已，作如是念：『此所見者，無實象身、無實馬身、車身、步身，末尼、真珠、琉璃、螺貝、璧玉、珊瑚，種種財、穀、庫藏等身；然有幻狀迷惑眼事。於中發起大象身想，或大象身差別之想，乃至發起種種財、穀、庫藏等想，或彼種類差別之想。』不如所見，不如所聞，堅固執著，隨起言說：『唯此諦實，餘皆愚妄。』為欲表知如是義故，亦於此中隨起言說。彼於後時不須觀察。」
<<< Those sentient beings that are not ignorant, not dull, the kind with good intellect, that have some knowledge. When they see or hear of these illusory things made of tiles, shards, grass, leaves, and wood they think, ‘This, what I am seeing, is not really an elephant, not really a horse, cart, soldiers, maṇi jewels, true pearls, lapis lazuli, conch shells, precious jade, rare coral, and all kinds of various goods, grain, veritable treasuries of such things. These are just illusions of a magician deceiving the eye, bringing about the arising of the perceiving of a large elephant, or the differentiated perception of a large elephant, as well as the arising of the perception of all kinds of goods, grain, veritable treasuries, or the differentiated perception of all of those kinds of things.’ They do not steadfastly cling to things as they appear or how they have heard [spoken about], and they go on to say, ‘Only this is real [i.e. that elephants are ‘illusory’ and not real], everything else is delusion.’ But they only go on to say this with the desire for [others] to understand meaning as such. Afterward they do not need to observe things more carefully.”
>>> 「如是，若有眾生是愚夫類，是異生類，未得諸聖出世間慧，於一切法離言法性不能了知；彼於一切有為、無為，見已聞已，作如是念：『此所得者，決定實有有為、無為。』如其所見，如其所聞，堅固執著，隨起言說：『唯此諦實，餘皆癡妄。』彼於後時應更觀察。
<<< Like this, there are sentient beings that are ignorant simpleton types, the common types, not yet having attained the transcendent wisdom of all sages, unable to comprehend the nature of all dharmas that is beyond speech. When they see and hear about the conditioned and unconditioned they think, ‘This, what I have attained, is most certainly really the conditioned and the unconditioned.’ Thus, they steadfastly cling to what they see and what they hear of, and go on to say, ‘Only this is real, everything else is delusion.’ Afterward they need to observe things more carefully.
>>> 「若有眾生非愚夫類，已見聖諦，已得諸聖出世間慧，於一切法離言法性如實了知；彼於一切有為、無為，見已聞已，作如是念：『此所得者，決定無實有為、無為。然有分別所起行相，猶如幻事迷惑覺慧，於中發起為、無為想，或為、無為差別之想。』不如所見，不如所聞，堅固執著，隨起言說：『唯此諦實，餘皆癡妄。』為欲表知如是義故，亦於此中隨起言說。彼於後時不須觀察。
<<< Those sentient beings that are not ignorant simpleton types, who have seen the Truth of the sages, who have attained the transcendent knowledge of all sages, who have comprehended the nature of all dharmas that is beyond speech. When they see and hear about the conditioned and unconditioned they think, ‘This, what I have attained, is most certainly not really the conditioned and the unconditioned. Rather they are differentiations arising from conditioned characteristics, just like the illusory [magical] effects [goings ons 事] from imagination are confused understandings in which one gives rise to ideas about the conditioned and the unconditioned, and ideas about whether they exist or not.’ They do not steadfastly cling to things just as they appear, or how they have heard [spoken about], and they go on to say, ‘Only this is real, everything else is delusion.’ But they only go on to say this with the desire for [others] to understand meaning as such. Afterward they do not need to observe things more carefully.”
>>> 「如是，善男子！彼諸聖者於此事中，以聖智、聖見，離名言故，現等正覺；即於如是離言法性，為欲令他現等覺故，假立名想，謂之有為，謂之無為。」
<<< Thus, Kulaputra! All sages, in the midst of things [goings ons 事] like this, realize correct enlightenment with sagely knowledge and sagely vision that is beyond speech. The nature of the Dharma also being beyond speech like this, desiring for others to manifest correct enlightenment, they employ names to perceive what are called the conditioned and the unconditioned?”
>>> 爾時，解甚深義密意菩薩，欲重宣此義而說頌曰：
<<< Then, Gambhirārthasamdhinirmocana Bodhisattva, wishing to emphasize the meaning of this said in verse:
>>> 佛說離言無二義，　　
甚深非愚之所行；　
愚夫於此癡所惑，　　
樂著二依言戲論。
<<< The Buddha has explained, beyond speech, the meaning of nonduality,
Extremely profound, not the way of the ignorant.
The ignorant, in their deluded confusion
Delight in clinging to duality, relying on verbal fabrications and debate.
>>> 彼或不定或邪定，　　
流轉極長生死苦；　
復違如是正智論，　　
當生牛羊等類中。
<<< They are either without certainty or perverse [in understanding],
Flowing along in the suffering of birth and death for a long time;
They go against the discourses on correct wisdom and
will certainly be reborn as cows, sheep, and so forth.

PART TWO - Born of the Dharma
>>> 爾時，法涌菩薩白佛言：「世尊！從此東方過七十二殑伽河沙等世界，有世界，名具大名稱；是中如來，號廣大名稱。我於先日，從彼佛土發來至此。我於彼佛土曾見一處，有七萬七千外道并其師首，同一會坐。為思諸法勝義諦相，彼共思議、稱量、觀察、遍推求時，於一切法勝義諦相，竟不能得。唯除種種意解，別異意解，變異意解，互相違背共興諍論，口出矛[矛(替-曰+貝)]，更相[矛(替-曰+貝)]已、刺已、惱已、壞已，各各離散。世尊！我於爾時，竊作是念：『如來出世，甚奇！希有！由出世故，乃於如是超過一切尋思所行勝義諦相，亦有通達，作證可得。』」說是語已。
<<< At that time, Dharmodgata Bodhisattva (’Born of the ‘Dharma’) said to the Buddha: “World-honored One! East of here, past as many worlds as grains of sand in seventy-two Ganges Rivers, there is a world-system named Viśālakīrti (’Renowned’). The Tathāgata there is named Mahaviśālakīrti Tathāgata (’Great Renown’). I used to live there before I came here. In that Buddha Land I once saw seventy-seven thousand heretics all seated with their teachers gathered together in one place. Regarding the characteristic of the ultimate meaning of all things (sarva-dharma-paramārtha-satya-lakṣana 諸法勝義諦相), they thought, pondered, investigated, and thoroughly examined, but in the end they were unable to reach any conclusion about the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning of all things. They went no further than to exclude certain interpretations, delineate other interpretations, and modify their own interpretations. They confronted one another and argued fiercely. Their mouths emitted barbed comments, pointed, angry and vicious. Then each went a separate way. World-Honored One! At that time I thought to myself, ‘The appearance of a Tathāgata in the world is indeed most rare! Rare indeed! Only because of this appearance does it become possible to attain ‘realization’ (sākṣāt-karoti) of the characteristic of truth of ultimate meaning, which goes beyond (transcends, samatikram) the sphere of any reasoning (vitarka).’ This is what I said to myself.
>>> 爾時，世尊告法涌菩薩曰：「善男子！如是，如是！如汝所說。我於超過一切尋思勝義諦相，現等正覺；現等覺已，為他宣說、顯現、開解、施設、照了。何以故？我說：『勝義是諸聖者內自所證；尋思所行是諸異生展轉所證。』是故，法涌！由此道理，當知勝義超過一切尋思境相。復次，法涌！我說：『勝義無相所行；尋思但行有相境界。』是故，法涌！由此道理，當知勝義超過一切尋思境相。復次，法涌！我說：『勝義不可言說，尋思但行言說境界。』是故，法涌！由此道理，當知勝義超過一切尋思境相。復次，法涌！我說：『勝義絕諸表示，尋思但行表示境界。』是故，法涌！由此道理，當知勝義超過一切尋思境相。復次，法涌！我說：『勝義絕諸諍論，尋思但行諍論境界。』是故，法涌！由此道理，當知勝義超過一切尋思境相。
<<< At that time, the World-honored One addressed the Dharmodgata Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! So it is! So it is! Just as you have explained. I manifest correct enlightenment, which goes beyond all reasoning about the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning. Being already correctly enlightened, I proclaim, reveal, expound upon, share, and illumine for others. Why? I [have] said, ‘The ultimate meaning is something all sages internally ‘self-realize’, while reasoning is something ‘realized’ by the give and take of common people.’ For this reason, Dharmodgata! By way of this logic, you should know that the ultimate meaning goes beyond all the constructions of characteristics of reasoning (sarva vitarka viṣaya lakṣaṇa).

“Furthermore, Dharmodgata! I [have] said, ‘The ultimate meaning is something that functions without characteristics. Reasoning only functions with constructions (viṣaya) having characteristics.’ For this reason, Dharmodgata! By way of this logic, you should know that the ultimate meaning goes beyond all constructed realms of characteristics.”

“Furthermore, Dharmodgata! I [have] said, ‘The ultimate meaning cannot be spoken about. Reasoning can only be done within the constructs of language.’ For this reason, Dharmodgata! By way of this logic, you should know that the ultimate meaning goes beyond all constructed realms of characteristics.”

“Furthermore, Dharmodgata! I [have] said, ‘The ultimate meaning severs all indication. Reasoning is only done within the constructs of indication.’ By way of this logic, you should know that the ultimate meaning goes beyond all the constructions of characteristics of reasoning.”

“Furthermore, Dharmodgata! I [have] said, ‘The ultimate meaning severs all disputation. Reasoning is only done within the constructs of dispute.’ By way of this logic,  you should know that the ultimate meaning goes beyond all the constructions of characteristics of reasoning.”
>>> 「法涌！當知，譬如有人盡其壽量習辛苦味；於蜜、石蜜上妙美味，不能尋思、不能比度、不能信解。或於長夜由欲貪勝解諸欲熾火所燒然故；於內除滅一切色、聲、香、味、觸相妙遠離樂，不能尋思、不能比度、不能信解。或於長夜由言說勝解，樂著世間綺言說故；於內寂靜聖默然樂，不能尋思、不能比度、不能信解。或於長夜由見聞覺知表示勝解，樂著世間諸表示故；於永除斷一切表示薩迦耶滅究竟涅槃，不能尋思、不能比度、不能信解。法涌！當知，譬如有人於其長夜由有種種我所、攝受，諍論勝解，樂著世間諸諍論故；於北拘盧洲無我所、無攝受、離諍論，不能尋思、不能比度、不能信解。如是，法涌！諸尋思者，於超一切尋思所行勝義諦相，不能尋思、不能比度、不能信解。」
<<< “Dharmodgata! You should know, it’s like someone who has been accustomed to tart and bitter flavors their entire life. They would be incapable of understanding (‘reasoning’), evaluating, or believing in the wonderful flavor of honey or rock candy.”

“Or [someone who], during the ‘long night’ [of ignorance] has only had an overwhelming desire for sensual cravings, a desire that burns like fire. They would be incapable of understanding, evaluating, or believing in the wonderful joy of liberation that comes from the inner cessation of all the characteristics of forms, sounds, scents, flavors, feelings, and thoughts.”

“Or, during the ‘long night’, they cling to rhetoric and speech because of an overwhelming interest in words and talking. They would be incapable of understanding, evaluating, or believing in the joy and inner tranquility of sagely silence.”

“Or, during the ‘long night’, they are only concerned with and take delight in all the worldly explanations they hear, express and understand. They would be incapable of understanding, evaluating, or even believing in the final nirvana (cessation) that forever cuts off and eradicates personality (satkāya).”

“Dharmodgata! You should know, it’s like someone who, during their ‘long night’, has only had all kinds of ‘self-based’ possessions, attachments, arguments, and interests (adhimokṣa). Being attached to and delighting in worldly argumentation, they would be incapable of understanding, evaluating, or believing that in Uttarakuru [the northern continent] they are without self and possesions, free of argumentation.”

“Thus, Dharmodgata! All reasoning, is entirely incapable of understanding, evaluating, or believing the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning.”
>>> 爾時，世尊欲重宣此義，而說頌曰：
<<< Then, the World Honored One, to emphasize the meaning of this, said in verse:
>>> 內證無相之所行，　　
不可言說絕表示，　
息諸諍論勝義諦，　　
超過一切尋思相。」
<<< The characteristicless practice self-realized internally
Is ineffable, beyond explanation,
It is the truth of ultimate meaning that ends all dispute
And transcends all the characteristics of reasoning.

PART THREE - Well Purified Intellect
>>> 爾時，善清淨慧菩薩白佛言：「世尊！甚奇！乃至世尊！善說！如世尊言：『勝義諦相微細甚深，超過諸法一異性相，難可通達。』世尊！我即於此曾見一處，有眾菩薩等正修行勝解行地，同一會坐，皆共思議勝義諦相與諸行相一異性相。於此會中，一類菩薩作如是言：『勝義諦相與諸行相都無有異。』一類菩薩復作是言：『非勝義諦相與諸行相都無有異；然勝義諦相諸行相。』有餘菩薩疑惑猶豫，復作是言：『是諸菩薩，誰言諦實？誰言虛妄？誰如理行？誰不如理？』或唱是言：『勝義諦相與諸行相都無有異。』或唱是言：『勝義諦相異諸行相。』世尊！我見彼已竊作是念：『此諸善男子愚癡、頑鈍、不明、不善、不如理行，於勝義諦微細甚深，超過諸行一異性相，不能解了。』」說是語已。
<<< Then, Suvisuddhimati Bodhisattva Mahasattva (’Well Purified Intellect’) addressed the Buddha saying, “World Honored One!  So wonderful! Most world-honored one! Well said! Just as the World-Honored One says: ‘The characteristic of truth of ultimate meaning is extremely profound, going beyond the characteristics of all things (dharmas) having a ‘singularized’ or differentiated nature, difficult to perceive.”

“World Honored One! I once saw this place where there was a group of bodhisattvas cultivating the correct practices of the Stage of Liberation (9th bhumi; adhivimokṣa). Seated together, they were all thinking about whether the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning (paramārtha-satya-lakṣana) and all the characteristics of conditional thought formations (saṃskāra-lakṣaṇa) were alike or dissimilar [in terms of the] characteristic of their nature. Among those assembled, one group of bodhisattvas said something like, ‘There is no difference between the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra.’ Another group said, ‘It is not the case that there is no difference between the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra. There is [a difference between] the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra.’ There were other bodhisattvas who were in doubt and uncertain. They said, ‘Of these bodhisattvas, who is speaking the truth? Who is speaking falsely? Who is being logical? Who is not being logical?’  Some cried out saying, ‘There is no difference between the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra.’ Others cried out saying, ‘The characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning is different from all the characteristics of saṃskāra.’”

“World Honored One! When I saw that, I thought to myself, ‘All these ‘good’ (virtuous) sons are ignorant, confused, stupid, dull, unenlightened, not ‘good’ (virtuous), not being logical, unable to understand that the truth of ultimate meaning is subtle, extremely profound, going beyond all conditionings’ (saṃskāra) characteristic of having a ‘singularized’ or differentiated nature.”
>>> 爾時，世尊告善清淨慧菩薩曰：「善男子！如是，如是。如汝所說：『彼諸善男子愚癡、頑鈍、不明、不善、不如理行，於勝義諦微細甚深，超過諸行一異性相，不能解了。』何以故？善清淨慧！非於諸行如是行時，名能通達勝義諦相，或於勝義諦而得作證。何以故？善清淨慧！若勝義諦相與諸行相都無異者：應於今時一切異生皆已見諦；又諸異生皆應已得無上方便安隱涅槃；或應已證阿耨多羅三藐三菩提。若勝義諦相與諸行相一向異者：已見諦者於諸行相應不除遣；若不除遣諸行相者，應於相縛不得解脫；此見諦者於諸相縛不解脫故，於麁重縛亦應不脫；由於二縛不解脫故，已見諦者應不能得無上方便安隱涅槃；或不應證阿耨多羅三藐三菩提。
<<< Then, the World Honored One told Suvisuddhimati Bodhisattva, “Kulaputra! So it is. So it is. Just as you have said, ‘All those kulaputra are ignorant, confused, stupid, dull, unenlightened, not ‘good’ (virtuous), not being logical, unable to understand that the truth of ultimate meaning is subtle, extremely profound, going beyond the characteristic of all conditionings (saṃskāra) of having a similar or differentiated nature. For what reason?”

“Suvisuddhimati! One is unable to perceive the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning or realize the truth of ultimate meaning when one practices (conditions) as they are practicing (conditioning) with names. For what reason?”

“Suvisuddhimati! If it was the case that the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra were not different, then right now every different kind of being would all already see the Truth. They would also all have already attained the highest, most skillful, tranquil nirvana, and they all would also have realized anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. If it was the case that the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra were totally different then one who has seen the Truth would not have removed the bondage (bandha) of all the characteristics of saṃskāra. If one hasn’t removed all the characteristics of saṃskāra, one does not attain liberation from the bondage of characteristics. This person who has seen the Truth, but hasn’t been liberated from the bondage of all characteristics, is then also not free from the bondage of ‘gross, coarse heaviness’ (sthūla). Since they are not liberated from those two bondages [sthūla and lakṣaṇa], this person who has seen the truth is unable to attain the highest, most skillful, tranquil nirvana, and they also would not realize anuttara-samyak-sambodhi.”     
>>> 「善清淨慧！由於今時非諸異生皆已見諦；非諸異生已能獲得無上方便安隱涅槃；亦非已證阿耨多羅三藐三菩提。是故勝義諦相與諸行相都無異相，不應道理！若於此中作如是言：『勝義諦相與諸行相都無異者。』由此道理，當知一切非如理行，不如正理。
<<< “Suvisuddhimati! It is not the case that right now every different kind of being has all already seen the truth. It is not the case that all the different beings can proclaim that they have attained the highest, most skillful, tranquil nirvana, or that they have realized anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. For this reason, [to say that] the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra are not different is not logical. If, from this, you were to say, ‘The characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra are not different,’ you should know, this rationale it is totally not being logical, not correct logic.”
>>> 「善清淨慧！由於今時非見諦者於諸行相不能除遣，然能除遣；非見諦者於諸相縛不能解脫，然能解脫；非見諦者於麁重縛不能解脫，然能解脫；以於二障能解脫故，亦能獲得無上方便安隱涅槃；或有能證阿耨多羅三藐三菩提。是故勝義諦相與諸行相，一向異相，不應道理！若於此中作如是言：『勝義諦相與諸行相一向異者。』由此道理，當知一切非如理行，不如正理。
<<< “Suvisuddhimati! Neither is it the case that right now those who see the Truth have not been able to remove all the characteristics of saṃskāra, *for they *have been *able to remove them. Nor is it the case that those who see the Truth have not been able to be liberated from the bondage of all characteristics, for they *have been able to be liberated. Nor is it the case that those who see the truth have been unable to be liberated from the bondage of ‘gross heaviness’, for they have been able to be liberated. It is precisely because they have been able to be liberated from these two obstructions that they are also able to proclaim to have attained the highest, most skillful, tranquil nirvana, or that they have been able to realize anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. For this reason, [the assertions that] the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra are the same or that they are different in characteristic is not the way of logic! If, from this, you were to say, ‘the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra are the same or that they are different,’ you should know, this rationale it is totally not being logical, not correct logic.”
>>> 「復次，善清淨慧！若勝義諦相與諸行相都無異者，如諸行相墮雜染相，此勝義諦相亦應如是墮雜染相。善清淨慧！若勝義諦相與諸行相一向異者，應非一切行相共相，名勝義諦相。善清淨慧！由於今時勝義諦相非墮雜染相；諸行共相名勝義諦相。是故勝義諦相與諸行相都無異相，不應道理；勝義諦相與諸行相一向異相，不應道理！若於此中作如是言：『勝義諦相與諸行相都無有異；或勝義諦相與諸行相一向異者。』由此道理，當知一切非如理行，不如正理。
<<< “Furthermore, Suvisuddhimati! If the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra were not different, then, just as all the characteristics of saṃskāra are characterized as ‘falling’ (prāyaścitta?) into corruption (kaṣāya), then this characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning should also be falling into corruption. Suvisuddhimati! If the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra were totally different, then the common characteristic (sāmānya-lakṣaṇa) of every characteristic of saṃskāra wouldn’t be called the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning. Suvisuddhimati! Since, right now, the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning is not characterized as falling into corruption, the common characteristic of all saṃskāra is called the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning. For this reason, [the assertion that] the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra are not different is not logical; and [the assertion that] the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra are totally different is not logical! If, from this, you were to say, ‘The characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra were not different or that the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra are totally different,’ you should know, this rationale  is totally not being logical, not correct logic.”
>>> 「復次，善清淨慧！若勝義諦相與諸行相都無異者，如勝義諦相於諸行相無有差別，一切行相亦應如是無有差別。修觀行者於諸行中，如其所見、如其所聞、如其所覺、如其所知，不應後時更求勝義。若勝義諦相與諸行相一向異者，應非諸行唯無我性、唯無自性之所顯現，是勝義相。又應俱時別相成立，謂雜染相及清淨相。
<<< “Furthermore, Suvisuddhimati! If the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra were not different, then just as the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra are without differentiation, every characteristic of saṃskāra should then also be without differentiation like this. And one who cultivates awareness from within all saṃskāra would not need to further search for ultimate truth in what they have seen, what they have heard, what they are aware of and what they know, until a later time. If it was the case that the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra were totally different, then it would not be that all saṃskāra are merely selflessness in nature, and that that which manifests (appears) merely without self nature is the characteristic of ultimate meaning. But then, the characteristic of ultimate meaning would be being differentiated as both ‘corrupt’ (kaṣāya) and also ‘pure’ (vissudhi).”
>>> 「善清淨慧！由於今時一切行相皆有差別，非無差別；修觀行者於諸行中，如其所見、如其所聞、如其所覺、如其所知，復於後時更求勝義。又即諸行唯無我性、唯無自性之所顯現，名勝義相。又非俱時染淨二相別相成立。是故勝義諦相與諸行相都無有異、或一向異，不應道理！若於此中作如是言：『勝義諦相與諸行相都無有異、或一向異者。』由此道理，當知一切非如理行，不如正理。
<<< “Suviduddhimati! Right now each of the characteristics of saṃskāra are differentiated. It is not that they are undifferentiated. One who cultivates awareness from within all saṃskāra does further search for ultimate truth in what they have seen, what they have heard, what they are aware of, and what they know, until a later time. Furthermore, all saṃskāra are merely selfless (anātman) in nature, and that which manifests merely without inherent self-nature (niḥsvabhāva) is called the characteristic of ultimate meaning. And it is not that the two characteristics ‘corruption’ and ‘purity’ are simultaneously being used to establish each other. For this reason, [the assertion that] the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra are without any difference or that they are totally different is not logical! If, from this, you were to say, ‘The characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning and all the characteristics of saṃskāra are without any difference or that they are totally different,’ you should know, this rationale it is totally not being logical, not correct logic.”
>>> 「善清淨慧！如螺貝上鮮白色性，不易施設與彼螺貝一相異相。如螺貝上鮮白色性；金上黃色亦復如是。如箜篌聲上美妙曲性，不易施設與箜篌聲一相異相。如黑沈上有妙香性，不易施設與彼黑沈一相異相。如胡椒上辛猛利性，不易施設與彼胡椒一相異相。如胡椒上辛猛利性，訶梨淡性亦復如是。如蠧羅綿上有柔軟性，不易施設與蠧羅綿一相異相。如熟酥上所有醍醐，不易施設與彼熟酥一相異相。又如一切行上無常性，一切有漏法上苦性，一切法上補特伽羅無我性，不易施設與彼行等一相異相。又如貪上不寂靜相及雜染相，不易施設此與彼貪一相異相。如於貪上，於瞋、癡上，當知亦爾。如是，善清淨慧！勝義諦相不可施設與諸行相一相異相。
<<< “Suviduddhimati! It is like the fresh white color coming from a conch shell, it is not easily defined as being the same in characteristic or different in characteristic from the conch shell. Like the nature of the fresh white color of a conch shell, the gold color coming from gold is also like this. Like the nature of the sound of beautiful melodies coming from a lute, they are not easily defined as being the same in characteristic or different in characteristic from the lute. Like the nature of a subtle fragrance coming from incense, it is not easily defined as being the same in characteristic or different in characteristic from the incense. Like the bitter taste coming from pepper, it is not easily defined as being the same in characteristic or different in characteristic from pepper, or the nature of the taste coming from a pungent nut is also like this. Like the softness coming from silk, it is not easily defined as being the same in characteristic or different in characteristic from the silk. Like cream coming from milk, it is not easily defined as being the same in characteristic or different in characteristic from the milk. So too, like the nature of all saṃskāra coming from impermanence, the nature of all outflowing dharmas coming from suffering, the nature of all dharmas coming from a selfless pudgala, they are not easily defined as being the same in characteristic or different in characteristic from those corresponding saṃskāra. So too, like the characteristics of restlessness (inquietude) and moral affliction (saṃkleśa) coming from attraction (rāga), it is not easily defined as being the same in characteristic or different in characteristic from attraction. Like that which comes from attraction, you should know, that which comes from aversion and confusion is also so. Like this, Suviduddhimati! The characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning is not easily defined as being the same in characteristic or different in characteristic from the characteristics of saṃskāra.”
>>> 「善清淨慧！我於如是微細、極微細，甚深、極甚深，難通達、極難通達，超過諸法一異性相，勝義諦相現正等覺；現等覺已為他宣說、顯示、開解、施設、照了。」
<<< “Suviduddhimati! I realize correct, equanimous awakening to the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning which is subtle, extremely subtle, profound, extremely profound, difficult to penetrate, extremely difficult to penetrate, going beyond the nature of similitude or difference of all dharmas, and having realized equanimous awakening, I explain it to others, reveal it, ‘open it up’, define it, and illuminate it.”
>>> 爾時，世尊欲重宣此義，而說頌曰：
<<< At that time, the World Honored One, wanting to emphasis this meaning, spoke in verse saying:
>>> 行界勝義相，　　
離一異性相；　
若分別一異，　　
彼非如理行。
<<< The characteristics of the realm of saṃskāra and that of ultimate truth
Go beyond the characteristics of having the nature of similitude or difference.
If one differentiates [things as] one or different
That is not acting (practicing, or conditioning) logically.
>>> 眾生為相縛，　　
及彼麁重縛；　
要勤修止觀，　　
爾乃得解脫。」
<<< Sentient beings are bound by characteristics
And they are bound by ‘gross heaviness’ (sthūla).
It is important to practice with drive (vīrya) *‘stopping’ and ‘observing’ (śamatha* and vipaśyanā)
So as to attain liberation (vimokṣa).

PART FOUR - Subhūti
>>> 爾時，世尊告長老善現曰：「善現！汝於有情界中，知幾有情懷增上慢，為增上慢所執持故記別所解？汝於有情界中，知幾有情離增上慢記別所解？」
<<< At that time, the World Honored One said to the elder Subhūti, “Subhūti! How many people do you know in the world that express their understanding (or liberation) with pride (or conceit) and how many people do you know in the world that express their understanding without pride?”
>>> 長老善現白佛言：「世尊！我知有情界中少分有情離增上慢記別所解。世尊！我知有情界中有無量無數不可說有情懷增上慢，為增上慢所執持故記別所解。
<<< The elder Subhūti replied to the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! I know very few people in the world who express their understanding without pride. World-Honored One! I know immeasurable numbers of sentient beings who are prideful and express their understanding with pride.”
>>> 「世尊！我於一時住阿練若大樹林中，時有眾多苾芻亦於此林依近我住。我見彼諸苾芻於日後分，展轉聚集，依有所得現觀，各說種種相法，記別所解。
<<< “World-Honored One! I was once abiding in an āraṇya within a large forest. At that time, there were also many bhikṣus dwelling nearby. I saw all those bhikṣus gather together one morning after sunrise and, based upon the insight(s) each had attained, they explained the various characteristics of the Dharma according to their understanding.”    
>>> 「於中一類，由得蘊故、得蘊相故、得蘊起故、得蘊盡故、得蘊滅故、得蘊滅作證故，記別所解。如此一類由得蘊故，復有一類由得處故，復有一類得緣起故，當知亦爾。
<<< Among one type, their understanding was because of only attaining [knowledge of] the aggregates, attaining [knowledge of] the characteristics of the aggregates, attaining [knowledge of] the arising of the aggregates, attaining [knowledge of] the disintegration of the aggregates, attaining [knowledge of] the cessation of the aggregates, and attaining realization of the cessation of the aggregates. Just as this type only attained [knowledge of] the aggregates, there was another type that attained [knowledge of] the bases (āyatana), while another type attained [knowledge of] dependent origination in the same way.”
>>> 「復有一類由得食故、得食相故、得食起故、得食盡故、得食滅故、得食滅作證故，記別所解。
<<< “There was another type whose understanding was because of only attaining knowledge of [four kinds of] sustenance (āhāra: food, contact, continuity, and consciousness), attaining [knowledge of] the characteristics of sustenance, attaining [knowledge of] the disintegration of sustenance, attaining [knowledge of] the cessation of sustenance, and attaining realization of the cessation of sustenance.”
>>> 「復有一類由得諦故、得諦相故、得諦遍知故、得諦永斷故、得諦作證故、得諦修習故，記別所解。
<<< “There was another type whose understanding was because of only attaining [knowledge of] the [Four Noble] Truth(s), attaining [knowledge of] the characteristics of the Truth(s), attaining full knowledge of the Truth(s), attaining realization of the Truth(s), and attaining complete cultivation of the Truth(s).”
>>> 「復有一類由得界故、得界相故、得界種種性故、得界非一性故、得界滅故、得界滅作證故，記別所解。
<<< There was another type whose understanding was because of only attaining knowledge of realms, attaining [knowledge of] the characteristics of realms, attaining [knowledge of] the various natures of realms, attaining [knowledge of] the non-unity of realms, attaining [knowledge of] the cessation of realms, and attaining realization of the cessation of realms.”
>>> 「復有一類由得念住故、得念住相故、得念住能治所治故、得念住修故、得念住未生令生故、得念住生已堅住不忘倍修增廣故，記別所解。如有一類得念住故；復有一類得正斷故；得神足故；得諸根故；得諸力故；得覺支故，當知亦爾。
<<< There was another type whose understanding was because of only attaining [knowledge of] [the Four] Foundations of mindfulness, attaining [knowledge of] the characteristics of Foundations of Mindfulness, attaining [knowledge of] the states controlled by the Foundations of Mindfulness, attaining, attaining [knowledge of] the cultivation of the Foundations of Mindfulness, attaining [knowledge of] their arising from a state of being non-arisen, and attaining [knowledge of] their assured non-forgetfulness after arising, and the increasing of mindfulness from repeated practice. Just as there were those whose understanding was only because of attaining [knowledge of] the Foundations of Mindfulness, there were others whose knowledge was because of only attaining [knowledge of] correct severance, because of attaining spiritual accomplishments, because of attaining [spiritual] faculties, because of attaining [spiritual] powers, and because of attaining the factors of awakening in the same way.
>>> 「復有一類得八支聖道故、得八支聖道相故、得八支聖道能治所治故、得八支聖道修故、得八支聖道未生令生故、得八支聖道生已堅住不忘倍修增廣故，記別所解。
<<< There was another type whose understanding was because of attaining [knowledge of] the Noble Eightfold Path, attaining [knowledge of] the characteristics of the Noble Eightfold Path, attaining knowledge of the states controlled by the Noble Eightfold Path, and attaining [knowledge of] the Noble Eightfold Path arising from a state of being non-arisen, and attaining [knowledge of] its assured non-forgetfulness after arising, and its broadening from repeated practice.”
>>> 「世尊！我見彼已竊作是念：『此諸長老依有所得現觀，各說種種相法，記別所解。當知彼諸長老，一切皆懷增上慢，為增上慢所執持故，於勝義諦遍一切一味相，不能解了。』是故，世尊！甚奇！乃至世尊！善說！如世尊言：『勝義諦相，微細、最微細，甚深、最甚深，難通達、最難通達，遍一切一味相。』世尊！此聖教中修行苾芻，於勝義諦遍一切一味相尚難通達，況諸外道。」
<<< “World-Honored One! When I saw this, I thought to myself, ‘All these venerables, based upon the insight(s) each had attained, explain the various characteristics of the Dharma according to their understanding. One should know, all those venerables expressed their understanding with pride, and because they have pride they are unable to comprehend the characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning that pervades everything as a single flavor. For this reason, World-Honored One! How rare! The World-Honored One has well explained! Like the World-Honored One said, ‘The characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning is subtle, most subtle, is profound, most profound, is difficult to fathom, most difficult to fathom, pervading everything as a characteristic of a “single flavor” (eka-rasatā).’ World-Honored One! If among these practicing sages (monastics) it is difficult to fathom this characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning that pervades everything as a single flavor, how much more so for those of ‘outside ways’ (i.e. heretics)?”       
>>> 爾時，世尊告長老善現曰：「如是，如是。善現！我於微細最微細、甚深最甚深、難通達最難通達，遍一切一味相勝義諦，現正等覺；現等覺已，為他宣說、顯示、開解、施設、照了。何以故？善現！我已顯示於一切蘊中清淨所緣，是勝義諦。我已顯示於一切處、緣起、食、諦、界、念住、正斷、神足、根、力、覺支、道支中清淨所緣，是勝義諦。此清淨所緣於一切蘊中，是一味相、無別異相；如於蘊中，如是於一切處中，乃至一切道支中，是一味相、無別異相。是故，善現！由此道理，當知勝義諦是遍一切一味相。
<<< Then the World-Honored One said to the elder Subhūti, “So it is. So it is. Subhūti! I have correctly awakened to the subtle, most subtle, the profound, most profound, difficult to penetrate, most difficult to penetrate truth of ultimate meaning which pervades everything as a characteristic of a ‘single flavor’. Having correctly awakened, I explain it to others, point out, analyze, define, and illuminate it. How so? Subhūti! I have already pointed out that the purity of conditions within all the aggregates is the truth of ultimate meaning. I have already pointed out that the purity of conditions among all bases, dependent origination, sustenance, Truth(s), realms, Foundations of Mindfulness, correct severance, spiritual accomplishments, faculties, powers, factors of awakening, and the Path is the truth of ultimate meaning. This purification of the conditions among all the aggregates is of the characteristic of a ‘single flavor’, an undifferentiatable characteristic. And, as among the aggregates, so too among all the bases up to and including all the factors of the Path, they are of the characteristic of a ‘single flavor’, an undifferentiatable characteristic. For this reason, Subhūti! Only from this path of logic, you should know that the truth of ultimate meaning is a characteristic that pervades everything as a single flavor.”
>>> 「復次，善現！修觀行苾芻，通達一蘊真如勝義法無我性已，更不尋求各別餘蘊、諸處、緣起、食、諦、界、念住、正斷、神足、根、力、覺支、道支真如勝義法無我性。唯即隨此真如勝義無二智為依止，故於遍一切一味相勝義諦，審察趣證。是故，善現！由此道理，當知勝義諦是遍一切一味相。
<<< Furthermore, Subhūti! Bhikṣus cultivating observational practices, having penetrated the ultimate meaning of the true suchness of the selfless nature of a single aggregate, need not seek further the ultimate meaning of the true suchness of the selfless nature of each different aggregate, base, dependency, sustenance, Truth, realm, Foundation of Mindfulness, correct severance, spiritual accomplishment, faculty, power, factor of awakening, or factor of the Path. Solely by going along with this nondual wisdom of the true suchness of ultimate meaning as a foundation does one come to awareness and realization of the all-pervading ‘single flavor’ characteristic of the truth of ultimate meaning. For this reason, Subhūti! Only from this path of logic, you should know that the truth of ultimate meaning is the characteristic of a ‘single flavor’ that pervades everything.”     
>>> 「復次，善現！如彼諸蘊展轉異相，如彼諸處、緣起、食、諦、界、念住、正斷、神足、根、力、覺支、道支，展轉異相。若一切法真如勝義法無我性亦異相者，是則真如勝義法無我性亦應有因，從因所生。若從因生應是有為，若是有為應非勝義，若非勝義應更尋求餘勝義諦。善現！由此真如勝義法無我性，不名有因，非因所生，亦非有為，是勝義諦，得此勝義更不尋求餘勝義諦。唯有常常時、恒恒時，如來出世、若不出世，諸法法性安立，法界安住。是故，善現！由此道理，當知勝義諦是遍一切一味相。
<<< Furthermore, Subhūti! Just as all the aggregates are described as [having] different characteristics, so too, all the bases, dependencies, sustenances, Truths, realms, Foundations of Mindfulness, correct severances, spiritual accomplishments, faculties, powers, factors of awakening and factors of the Path are describes as [having] different characteristics. If, like these, the ultimate meaning of the true suchness of the selfless nature of all dharmas was also differentiated, then the ultimate meaning of the true suchness of the selfless nature of dharmas should have a cause, they would arise from a cause. If arisen from a cause, then it would be conditioned, and if it is something conditioned then it is not ultimate meaning, and if it is not ultimate meaning then one would need to seek further for the truth ultimate meaning. Subhūti! Since the ultimate meaning of the true suchness of the selfless nature of all dharmas is not said to be caused, does not arise from causes and is not conditioned, it is the truth of ultimate meaning. One who attains this ultimate meaning does not need to further search for the truth of ultimate meaning. Only upon the eternally eternal, constantly constant establishment of the Dharmadhatu is the dharmic nature of all dharmas established, whether a Thus Come One appears in the world or not. For this reason, Subhūti! Only from this path of logic you should know, the truth of ultimate meaning is the characteristic of a ‘single flavor’ that pervades everything.”
>>> 「善現！譬如種種非一品類異相色中，虛空無相、無分別、無變異、遍一切一味相。如是，異性、異相一切法中，勝義諦遍一切一味相，當知亦然。」
<<< Subhūti! Just as how among all the various kinds of different and similar types of characteristics and forms of things, space is characteristicless, without differentiation and without change, an all-pervading characteristic of a single flavor. Like this, among the different natures and different characteristics of all dharmas, the truth of ultimate meaning pervades everything as a characteristic of a ‘single flavor’.
>>> 爾時，世尊欲重宣此義，而說頌曰：
<<< At that time, the World Honored One, wanting to emphasis this meaning, spoke in verse saying:
>>> 此遍一切一味相，　　
勝義諸佛說無異；　
若有於中異分別，　　
彼定愚癡依上慢。」
<<< This characteristic of a ‘single flavor’ that pervades everything,
Is no different than the ultimate meaning explained by all buddhas.
If there is any difference or differentiation between them,
That is certainly ignorant and prideful.
>>> 心意識相品第三
<<< Chapter 3 - The Characteristics Mind, Thought, and Consciousness 心意識相
>>> 爾時，廣慧菩薩摩訶薩白佛言：「世尊！如世尊說：『於心意識祕密善巧菩薩。』於心意識祕密善巧菩薩者，齊何名為於心意識祕密善巧菩薩？如來齊何施設彼為於心意識祕密善巧菩薩？」說是語已。
<<< At that time, the bodhisattva mahasattva Viśālamati (’Vast Intellect’) said to the Buddha, “World-Honored One! As the World-Honored One has spoken of, ‘bodhisattvas skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and consciousness.’ Why is a bodhisattva skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and consciousness called a bodhisattva skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and consciousness? Why has the Thus Come One given the description of them as bodhisattvas skilled in the secrets of  mind (citta), thought (manas), and consciousness (vijñāna)?”
>>> 爾時，世尊告廣慧菩薩摩訶薩曰：「善哉，善哉！廣慧！汝今乃能請問如來如是深義；汝今為欲利益安樂無量眾生，哀愍世間、及諸天、人、阿素洛等；為令獲得義利安樂，故發斯問。汝應諦聽，吾當為汝說心意識祕密之義。
<<< Then the World-Honored One told Viśālamati bodhisattva mahasattva, “Excellent, excellent! Viśālamati ! You are now able to ask the Thus Come One about the profound meaning of this. You now generate this question because you desire to benefit and gladden immeasurable sentient beings, with compassion for the world and all the gods, humans, and asuras, in order for them to realize the meaning, to benefit them, and to gladden them. You should listen closely. I will explain for you the meaning of he mysteries of the mind, thought, and consciousness?”
>>> 「廣慧當知，於六趣生死彼彼有情，墮彼彼有情眾中，或在卵生、或在胎生、或在濕生、或在化生，身分生起，於中最初一切種子心識成熟、展轉、和合、增長、廣大。依二執受：一者、有色諸根及所依執受；二者、相名分別言說戲論習氣執受。有色界中具二執受，無色界中不具二種。
<<< “Viśālamati, you should know, all those various beings within the six destines of life & death fall into different types of beings. Whether born of an egg, born of a womb, born of moisture, or born by transformation, their bodies separate and arise, within which, from the very beginning, all the seeds of mind-consciousness (citta vijñāna) develop, transforms, comes together, grows and expands depending upon two appropriations: 1. The appropriation of material senses and what they depend on, and 2. the appropriation of the propensity toward differentiating characteristics by names and verbal fabrications. Within the realm of form there are these two appropriations. Within the formless realm there are not these two kinds.”
>>> 「廣慧！此識亦名阿陀那識。何以故？由此識於身隨逐執持故。亦名阿賴耶識。何以故？由此識於身攝受、藏隱、同安危義故。亦名為心。何以故？由此識色聲香味觸等積集滋長故。
<<< “Viśālamati! This consciousness is also called ādānavijñāna (’clinging consciousness’). Why? Because this consciousness follows and clings to the body. It is also called ālayavijñāna. Why? because this consciousness embraces the body, is stored within it, jointly at peace and in peril. It is also known as mind (citta). Why? Because this consciousness accumulates and amplifies forms, sounds, scents, flavors, tactile feelings, and so on.”
>>> 「廣慧！阿陀那識為依止、為建立故，六識身轉，謂眼識、耳、鼻、舌、身、意識。此中有識：眼及色為緣生眼識，與眼識俱隨行，同時、同境，有分別意識轉。有識：耳、鼻、舌、身，及聲、香、味、觸為緣，生耳、鼻、舌、身識，與耳、鼻、舌、身識俱隨行，同時、同境，有分別意識轉。廣慧！若於爾時一眼識轉，即於此時唯有一分別意識，與眼識同所行轉。若於爾時二、三、四、五諸識身轉，即於此時唯有一分別意識，與五識身同所行轉。
<<< “Viśālamati! With the ādānavijñāna as a basis, as a foundation, the six consciousnesses of the body (r)evolve, which are eye consciousness, ear, nose, tongue, body, and thought consciousness. Within this there is consciousness: with eye and form as a condition there arises eye-consciousness. Along with eye-consciousness there is also, at the same time, with the same objective reference, a differentiating thought consciousness (manasvijñāna) that (r)evolves. There is consciousness: with ear, nose, tongue, body, and sounds, scents, flavors, and tactile feelings as conditions there arises ear, nose, tongue and body consciousness. Along with ear, nose, tongue and body consciousness there is also, at the same time, with the same objective reference, a differentiating thought consciousness (manasvijñāna) that (r)evolves. Viśālamati! If at some point in time a single visual consciousness (r)evolves, then at this time there will only be a single differentiating thought consciousness that (r)evolves along with visual consciousness. If, at some point in time, there are two, three, four, or five bodily consciousnesses (r)evolving, then at this time there will only be a single differentiating thought consciousness that (r)evolves along with these five bodily consciousnesses.”       
>>> 「廣慧！譬如大瀑水流，若有一浪生緣現前，唯一浪轉；若二、若多浪生緣現前，有多浪轉。然此瀑水自類恒流無斷無盡。又如善淨鏡面，若有一影生緣現前，唯一影起；若二、若多影生緣現前，有多影起。非此鏡面轉變為影，亦無受用滅盡可得。
<<< Viśālamati! Just like a great torrent of flowing water, if the conditions for one wave are present, only one wave will (r)evolve. If the conditions for two or more waves are present, many waves will (r)evolve. Yet this torrent of water, itself, flows constantly, without interruption or cessation. It is also like the surface of a very clean mirror. If the conditions for one image are present, then only one image will appear. If the conditions for two or more images are present, then many images will appear. It is not that the surface of the mirror changes into images, and no end to its function can be found.”
>>> 「如是，廣慧！由似瀑流阿陀那識為依止、為建立故，若於爾時有一眼識生緣現前，即於此時一眼識轉；若於爾時乃至有五識身生緣現前，即於此時五識身轉。
<<< Like this, Viśālamati! With the torrential flow of the ādānavijñāna as a basis, as a foundation, if at some point in time there are the conditions for a single visual consciousness to arise, then at this time a single visual consciousness (r)evolves. If, at some point in time there are the conditions for five bodily consciousnesses to arise, then at this time five bodily consciousnesses will (r)evolve.”
>>> 「廣慧！如是菩薩雖由法住智為依止、為建立故，於心意識祕密善巧。然諸如來不齊於此，施設彼為於心意識一切祕密善巧菩薩。廣慧！若諸菩薩於內各別：如實不見阿陀那、不見阿陀那識；不見阿賴耶、不見阿賴耶識；不見積集、不見心；不見眼色及眼識；不見耳聲及耳識；不見鼻香及鼻識；不見舌味及舌識；不見身觸及身識；不見意法及意識；是名勝義善巧菩薩；如來施設彼為勝義善巧菩薩。廣慧！齊此名為於心意識一切祕密善巧菩薩；如來齊此施設彼為於心意識一切祕密善巧菩薩。」
<<< Viśālamati! Like this, bodhisattvas, with the wisdom of abiding in the Dharma as a basis, as a foundation, are skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and consciousness, yet it is not on this account that the Thus Come One describes them as skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and consciousness. Viśālamati! If all bodhisattvas within themselves truly do not see ādāna, (appropriation), do not see ādānavijñāna, do not see ālaya (storage), do not see ālayavijñāna, do not see accumulation (cita-sthaṃ), do not see mind (citta), do not see the eyes, forms or eye-consciousness, do not see ears, sounds, and ear-consciousness, do not see the nose, scents, and nose-consciousness, do not see the tongue, tastes, or tongue consciousness, do not see the body, tactile feelings, or body-consciousness, do not see thought, thoughts, or thought-consciousness, this is called being a bodhisattva skilled in ultimate meaning and are described by the Thus Come One as bodhisattvas skilled in ultimate meaning. Viśālamati! It is on this account that they are called bodhisattvas skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and consciousness, and are so described by
the Thus Come One.”
>>> 爾時，世尊欲重宣此義，而說頌曰：
<<< Then, the World Honored One, to emphasize the meaning of this, said in verse:
>>> 阿陀那識甚深細，　　
一切種子如瀑流，　
我於凡愚不開演，　　
恐彼分別執為我。」
<<< The Ādānavijñāna is profound and subtle,
All seeds are like a torrential flow,
I do not explain it to the ignorant,
Fearing that it be differentiated and clung to as a self.
>>> 一切法相品第四
<<< Chapter 4 - The Characteristic of all Dharmas 一切法相
>>> 爾時，德本菩薩摩訶薩白佛言：「世尊！如世尊說：『於諸法相善巧菩薩。』於諸法相善巧菩薩者，齊何名為於諸法相善巧菩薩？如來齊何施設彼，為於諸法相善巧菩薩？」說是語已。
<<< At that time, Guṇākara (’Root of Virtue’) bodhisattva mahasattva  asked the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! The World-Honored One has spoken of ‘bodhisattvas skilled in the characteristics of all things (dharmas).’ Why is a bodhisattva skilled in the characteristics of all things **called a bodhisattva skilled in the characteristics of all things? Why has the Thus Come One given the description of them as bodhisattvas skilled in the characteristics of all things?”
>>> 爾時，世尊告德本菩薩曰：「善哉！德本！汝今乃能請問如來如是深義；汝今為欲利益安樂無量眾生，哀愍世間、及諸天、人、阿素洛等；為令獲得義利安樂故，發斯問。汝應諦聽，吾當為汝說諸法相。
<<< Then the World-Honored One said to Guṇākara bodhisattva, “Excellent! Guṇākara! You are now able to ask the Thus Come One about the profound meaning of this. You now generate this question because you desire to benefit and gladden immeasurable sentient beings, with compassion for the world and all the gods, humans, and asuras, in order for them to realize the meaning, to benefit them, and to gladden them. You should listen closely. I will explain for you the meaning of he mysteries of the mind, thought, and consciousness?”
>>> 「謂諸法相略有三種，何等為三？一者、遍計所執相；二者、依他起相；三者、圓成實相。云何諸法遍計所執相？謂一切法名假安立自性差別，乃至為令隨起言說。云何諸法依他起相？謂一切法緣生自性，則此有故彼有，此生故彼生，謂無明緣行，乃至招集純大苦蘊。云何諸法圓成實相？謂一切法平等真如。於此真如，諸菩薩眾勇猛精進為因緣故，如理作意，無倒思惟為因緣故，乃能通達。於此通達，漸漸修集，乃至無上正等菩提方證圓滿。
<<< “It is said that there are three kinds of characteristics of all things (dharmas). What three? 1. Totally imaginary characteristics (parikalpita-lakṣaṇa) that are clung to; 2. The characteristic of arising in dependence upon another (paratantra-lakṣaṇa), and 3. The characteristic of complete, perfect reality (pariniṣpanna-lakṣaṇa). What are the totally imaginary characteristics of all things that are clung to? This is the establishing of conventional names for all things and distinguishing their self-natures (svabhava) in order to talk about them. What is the characteristic of all things arising in dependence upon another? This is the dependently originated nature of all things, and because there is this, there is that. Because this arises, that arises. Ignorance conditions saṃskāras and so on, bringing together a great mass of suffering aggregates. What is the characteristic of complete, perfect reality of all things? This is the equanimous, Real Suchness of all things. All bodhisattvas penetrate to this Real Suchness by their courageous determination, intelligent (or logical) focusing, and true reflection. By gradually cultivating this penetration, they reach unsurpassed true awakening and actually realize perfection.”
>>> 「善男子！如眩瞖人眼中所有眩瞖過患，遍計所執相當知亦爾。如眩瞖人眩瞖眾相：或髮毛、輪、蜂蠅、巨勝，或復青、黃、赤、白等相差別現前；依他起相當知亦爾。如淨眼人遠離眼中眩瞖過患，即此淨眼本性所行無亂境界；圓成實相當知亦爾。
<<< “Kulaputra! Like the ailment of cataracts (cloudy spots) for someone with cataracts in the eyes, you  should know, the imaginary characteristics of all things that are clung to are also like this. Like the ‘groups of characteristics’ that appear differentiated to someone with cataracts in the eyes, such as hair nets, wheels, flies, seeds, with blue, yellow, red, white colored characteristics, the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another, you should know, is also like this. Like someone with clear eyes, free of the ailments of cataracts in the eyes, the original nature of these pure eyes operating in an unconfused way about the objective world, the characteristic of complete, perfect reality, you should know, is also like this.”
>>> 「善男子！譬如清淨頗胝迦寶，若與青染色合，則似帝青、大青、末尼寶像；由邪執取帝青、大青、末尼寶故，惑亂有情。若與赤染色合，則似琥珀末尼寶像；由邪執取琥珀末尼寶故，惑亂有情。若與綠染色合，則似末羅羯多末尼寶像；由邪執取末羅羯多末尼寶故，惑亂有情。若與黃染色合，則似金像；由邪執取真金像故，惑亂有情。
<<< “Kulaputra! Just like a pure crystal (sphāṭika) jewel, if combined and tinted with the color blue, it appears to be the image of a royal blue, a great blue maṇi jewel. Because it takes on the appearance of the image of a royal blue, great blue maṇi jewel, it confuses sentient beings. If combined and tinted with the color red, it appears to be in the image of a ruby maṇi jewel (or amber, aśmagarbha). Because it takes on the appearance of the image of a ruby maṇi jewel, it confuses sentient beings. If combined and tinted with the color green, it appears to be in the image of an emerald maṇi jewel. Because it takes on the appearance of the image of an emerald maṇi jewel, it confuses sentient beings. If combined and tinted with the color yellow, it appears to a golden image. Because it takes on the appearance of a real golden image, it confuses sentient beings.”
>>> 「如是，德本！如彼清淨頗胝迦上，所有染色相應；依他起相上，遍計所執相言說習氣，當知亦爾。如彼清淨頗胝迦上，所有帝青、大青、琥珀、末羅羯多、金等邪執；依他起相上遍計所執相執，當知亦爾。如彼清淨頗胝迦寶；依他起相，當知亦爾。如彼清淨頗胝迦上，所有帝青、大青、琥珀、末羅羯多、真金等相，於常常時，於恒恒時，無有真實、無自性性，即依他起相上，由遍計所執相，於常常時、於恒恒時，無有真實、無自性性；圓成實相，當知亦爾。
<<< “Like this, Guṇākara! Just as those tinted colors appear upon that pure crystal, the propensities of language about totally imaginary characteristics upon the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another, you should know, are also like this. Just as those falsely perceived royal blues, great blues, rubies, emeralds and gold appear upon that pure crystal, grasping the imaginary characteristics upon the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another, you should know, is also like this. Just like that pure crystal jewel, the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another, you should know, is also like this. Just as those royal blues, great blues, rubies, emeralds and real gold that appear upon that pure crystal are always, forever without ever having any real existence, of a nature without self-nature, imaginary characteristics upon the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another that is always, forever without ever having any real existence, of a nature without self-nature, you should know, the characteristic of complete, perfect reality, is also like this.”
>>> 「復次，德本！相名相應以為緣故，遍計所執相而可了知；依他起相上，遍計所執相執以為緣故，依他起相而可了知；依他起相上，遍計所執相無執以為緣故，圓成實相而可了知。
<<< “Furthermore, Guṇākara! Due to the interdependence of characteristics and names, totally imaginary characteristics can be understood. Due to the interdependence of grasping and the totally imaginary characteristics upon the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another, the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another can be understood. Due to the interdependence of not grasping and the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed upon the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another, the characteristic of complete, perfect reality can be understood.
>>> 「善男子！若諸菩薩能於諸法依他起相上，如實了知遍計所執相，即能如實了知一切無相之法；若諸菩薩如實了知依他起相，即能如實了知一切雜染相法；若諸菩薩如實了知圓成實相，即能如實了知一切清淨相法。
<<< “Kulaputra! If bodhisattvas are able to understand, as they really are, all dharmas totally imaginary characteristics upon the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another, they then will be able to understand, as it really it, the characteristiclessness of things. If bodhisattvas are able to understand, as it really is, the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another, they then will be able to understand, as it really is, the defilement of all things. If bodhisattvas are able to understand, as it really is, the characteristic of complete, perfect reality, they then will be able to understand, as it really is, the purity of all things.”
>>> 「善男子！若諸菩薩能於依他起相上，如實了知無相之法，即能斷滅雜染相法；若能斷滅雜染相法，即能證得清淨相法。
<<< ‘Kulaputra! If bodhisattvas understand, as it really is, the ‘characteristiclessness thing’ upon the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another, then they are able to cut off and cease  defilements. If they are able to cut off and cease defilements, then they are able to realize attainment of things as purified.”
>>> 「如是，德本！由諸菩薩如實了知遍計所執相、依他起相、圓成實相故；如實了知諸無相法、雜染相法、清淨相法；如實了知無相法故，斷滅一切雜染相法，斷滅一切染相法故，證得一切清淨相法。齊此名為於諸法相善巧菩薩；如來齊此施設彼為於諸法相善巧菩薩。」
<<< “Like this, Guṇākara! Since all bodhisattvas understand, as they really are, imagined characteristics, the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another, and the the characteristic of complete, perfect reality, they understand, as they really are, the characteristiclessness of things, things characterized as defiled, and things characterized as pure. Because they understand, as it really is, the characteristiclessness of things, they cut off and cease all defilements, and because they cut off and cease all defilements, they realize attainment of all purified things. Thus, a bodhisattva is called a bodhisattva skilled in the characteristics of all dharmas? The Thus Come One has therefore given the description of them as bodhisattvas skilled in the characteristics of all dharmas.”
>>> 爾時，世尊欲重宣此義，而說頌曰：
<<< Then, the World Honored One, to emphasize the meaning of this, said in verse:
>>> 若不了知無相法，　　
雜染相法不能斷；　
不斷雜染相法故，　　
壞證微妙淨相法。
<<< One who does not understand the characteristiclessness of things,
Is unable to cut off defiled things,
And since not cutting off defiled things,
Ruining realization of the wonderous, pure characteristic of things.
>>> 不觀諸行眾過失，　　
放逸過失害眾生；　
懈怠住法動法中，　　
無有失壞可憐愍。」
<<< Not observing the errors of all saṃskāras,
One indulges in errors and harms sentient beings,
Lazy (kausīdya) among abiding and moving things,
How could someone so lost not be pitiable?

>>> 無自性相
<<< 
Chapter 5 - The Characteristic of Being without Self-Nature
>>> 爾時，勝義生菩薩摩訶薩白佛言：「世尊！我曾獨在靜處，心生如是尋思：『世尊以無量門曾說：「諸蘊所有自相，生相、滅相，永斷、遍知。」如說諸蘊，諸處、緣起、諸食亦爾。以無量門曾說：「諸諦所有自相，遍知、永斷、作證、修習。」以無量門曾說：「諸界所有自相、種種界性、非一界性、永斷、遍知。」以無量門曾說：「念住所有自相、能治、所治、及以修習，未生令生、生已堅住，不忘、倍修、增長、廣大。」如說念住、正斷、神足、根、力、覺支，亦復如是。以無量門曾說：「八支聖道所有自相、能治、所治、及以修習，未生令生、生已堅住，不忘、倍修、增長、廣大。」』世尊復說：『一切諸法皆無自性、無生、無滅、本來寂靜、自性涅槃。』未審世尊依何密意作如是說：『一切諸法皆無自性、無生、無滅、本來寂靜、自性涅槃。』我今請問如來斯義，惟願如來哀愍解釋，說一切法皆無自性、無生、無滅、本來寂靜、自性涅槃所有密意。」
<<< At that time, Paramārathasamudgata (’Born of Ultimate Truth’) bodhisattva mahasattva said to the Buddha, “World-Honored One! I was once alone in a quiet place and I thought to myself: ‘The
World-Honored One in an immeasurable number of teachings has explained, “the inherent characteristics (svalakṣaṇa) of the aggregates, the characteristic of their arising, the characteristic of their destruction, their complete severance, and their being totally understood.” Just as all the aggregates have been explained, all the bases (āyatana), dependent origination (pratītyasamutpāda), and sustenance (āhāra) have also [been explained]. With an immeasurable number of teachings he has explained, “the specific characteristics of the [noble] truths, their being totally understood, complete severance, their realization, and the practices [that lead to their realization].” With an immeasurable number of teachings he has explained, “the inherent characteristics of realms, the various natures of realms, the different nature of realms, their complete severance, and their being totally understood.” With an immeasurable number of teachings he has explained, “the inherent characteristics of the foundations of mindfulness, their being able to control [mental states], which [states] are controlled, how, by practice, what has not yet arisen can be produced, how what has already arisen can be maintained, their
unforgettableness, their repeated practice, their increase and their broadening.” Just as the foundations of mindfulness have been explained, correct severance, the spiritual path, [spiritual] faculties, [spiritual] powers, and the factors of awakening are also like this. With an immeasurable number of teachings he has explained, “the inherent characteristics of the Noble Eightfold Path, their being able to control [mental states], which [states] are controlled, how, by practice, what has not yet arisen can be produced, how what has already arisen can be maintained, their
unforgettableness, their repeated practice, their increase and their broadening.” The World-Honored One has also explained, “all dharmas are completely without inherent nature (svabhāva), are without arising (anutpāda), without ceasing (anirodha), are originally quiescent (śānti) with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa.” I wondered, based on what secret intent did the World-Honored One explain that, “all dharmas are completely without inherent nature, are without arising, without ceasing, are originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa?” I now kindly ask about the Thus Come One’s meaning, only wanting the Thus Come One to compassionately dispense (instruct) and explain what the secret intent is of explaining that all dharmas are completely without inherent nature, are without arising, without ceasing, are originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa.”
>>> 爾時，世尊告勝義生菩薩曰：「善哉，善哉！勝義生！汝所尋思，甚為如理。善哉，善哉！善男子！汝今乃能請問如來如是深義，汝今為欲利益安樂無量眾生，哀愍世間、及諸天、人、阿素洛等，為令獲得義利安樂故，發斯問。汝應諦聽，吾當為汝解釋所說『一切諸法皆無自性、無生、無滅、本來寂靜、自性涅槃所有密意。』
<<< Then, the World-Honored One told Paramārathasamudgata, “Excellent, excellent! Paramārathasamudgata! Your reasoning is most logical. Excellent, excellent! Kulaputra! You are now able to question the Thus Come One concerning this profound meaning. You now raise this question because you desire to benefit and gladden immeasurable sentient beings, for you have compassion for the world and all its devas, humans, and asuras, so that they may be led to attain meaning, benefit, and happiness. Listen closely and I will dispense my secret intent in explaining that all dharmas are completely without inherent nature, are without arising, without ceasing, are originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa.
>>> 「勝義生！當知我依三種無自性性密意，說言一切諸法皆無自性，所謂相無自性性、生無自性性、勝義無自性性。
<<< Paramārathasamudgata! You should know, I have explained that all dharmas are completely without inherent nature relying on the secret intent of three kinds of natures without inherent nature (nisvabhava-bhava?), which are, [1] the nature of characteristics lacking inherent nature, [2] the nature of arising lacking inherent nature, and [3] the nature of ultimate meaning (paramārtha) lacking inherent nature.”
>>> 「善男子！云何諸法相無自性性？謂諸法遍計所執相。何以故？此由假名安立為相，非由自相安立為相，是故說名相無自性性。
<<< “Kulaputra! What is the nature of the characteristics of all dharmas lacking inherent nature? This is all dharmas’ characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed. How so? It is only upon conventional names that characteristics come to be established, it is not by their own characteristics that characteristics are established, for this reason, the nature of characteristics are said to lack inherent nature.”
>>> 「云何諸法生無自性性？謂諸法依他起相。何以故？此由依他緣力故有，非自然有，是故說名生無自性性。
<<< “What is the nature of the arising of all dharmas lacking inherent nature? This is the characteristic of all dharmas arising in dependence upon another. How so? It is only in dependence upon the power of conditionality that there is (being, existence, are things), [things] do not exist of themselves, for this reason, the nature of arising is said to lack inherent nature.”
>>> 「云何諸法勝義無自性性？謂諸法由生無自性性故，說名無自性性；即緣生法，亦名勝義無自性性。何以故？於諸法中，若是清淨所緣境界，我顯示彼以為勝義無自性性，依他起相非是清淨所緣境界，是故亦說名為勝義無自性性。復有諸法圓成實相，亦名勝義無自性性。何以故？一切諸法法無我性名為勝義，亦得名為無自性性，是一切法勝義諦故，無自性性之所顯故。由此因緣，名為勝義無自性性。
<<< “What is the nature of the ultimate meaning of all dharmas lacking inherent nature? This is because, since the nature of the arising of all dharmas lacks inherent nature, nature is said to lack inherent nature. Conditionally arisen dharmas are then also called the nature of the ultimate meaning of all dharmas lacking inherent nature. How so? Among all dharmas, if it is a purified conditional realm, I reveal (preach) that to be the nature of the ultimate meaning of all dharmas lacking inherent nature. Characteristics that depend upon another are not a purified conditional realm. For this reason, it has also been said that this is called the nature of the ultimate meaning lacking inherent nature. Furthermore, all dharmas characteristic of complete, perfect reality is also called the nature of the ultimate meaning lacking inherent nature. How so? The self-less nature of all dharmas is called the ultimate meaning, it is also known as the nature of being without inherent nature (nisvabhava-bhava). Because this is the Truth of Ultimate Meaning of all dharmas, because this is the nature of being without inherent nature of which I preach, for these reasons it is known as the nature of the ultimate meaning of all dharmas lacking inherent nature.”
>>> 「善男子！譬如空花，相無自性性，當知亦爾。譬如幻像，生無自性性，當知亦爾；一分勝義無自性性，當知亦爾。譬如虛空，惟是眾色無性所顯，遍一切處；一分勝義無自性性，當知亦爾，法無我性之所顯故，遍一切故。
<<< “Kulaputra! Just like flowers in the sky, you should know, the nature of characteristics lacking inherent nature is also like this. Just like magical illusions, you should know, the nature of the arising of all dharmas lacking inherent nature is also like this. And, you should know, one part of the nature of the ultimate meaning of all dharmas lacking inherent nature is also like this. Just like empty space is manifested everywhere by the absence of material forms, you should know, another part of the nature of the ultimate meaning of all dharmas lacking inherent nature is also like this because it manifests everywhere by the selfless nature of all dharmas.”
>>> 「善男子！我依如是三種無自性性，密意說言：『一切諸法皆無自性。』
<<< “Kulaputra! Relying on three kinds of natures without inherent nature like this, I have explained with the secret intent, ‘all dharmas are completely lacking inherent nature.’”
>>> 「勝義生！當知，我依相無自性性，密意說言：『一切諸法無生、無滅、本來寂靜、自性涅槃。』何以故？若法自相都無所有，則無有生；若無有生，則無有滅；若無生無滅，則本來寂靜；若本來寂靜，則自性涅槃。於中都無少分所有更可令其般涅槃故。是故我依相無自性性，密意說言：『一切諸法無生、無滅、本來寂靜、自性涅槃。』
<<< “Paramārathasamudgata! You should know, relying on the nature of the characteristics of all dharmas lacking inherent nature, I have explained with the secret intent, ‘All dharmas are completely without inherent nature, are without arising, without ceasing, are originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa.’ How so? If the characteristics of dharmas do not exist unto themselves, then they do not have any arising. If there is no arising, there is no cessation, and if there is no arising and no ceasing, then originally quiescent. If originally quiescent, then of the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa, wherein there is not the slightest part that could be led once again to Parinirvāṇa. For this reason, relying on the nature of the characteristics of all dharmas lacking inherent nature, I have explained with the secret intent, ‘All dharmas are completely without inherent nature, are without arising, without ceasing, are originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa.’
>>> 「善男子！我亦依法無我性所顯勝義無自性性，密意說言：『一切諸法無生、無滅、本來寂靜、自性涅槃。』何以故？法無我性所顯勝義無自性性，於常常時、於恒恒時，諸法法性、安住、無為。一切雜染不相應故，於常常時、於恒恒時，諸法法性安住故無為，由無為故無生無滅；一切雜染不相應故，本來寂靜、自性涅槃。是故我依法無我性所顯勝義無自性性，密意說言：『一切諸法無生、無滅、本來寂靜、自性涅槃。』
<<< “Kulaputra!” Also, relying on the nature of the ultimate meaning manifested in the selfless nature of dharmas lacking inherent nature, I have explained with the secret intent, ‘All dharmas are completely without inherent nature, are without arising, without ceasing, are originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa’ How so? The nature of the ultimate meaning manifested in the selfless nature of dharmas lacking inherent nature is for all times and forever all dharmas dharmic nature peacefully abiding unconditioned. Since all the defilements do not appear, for all times and forever all dharmas dharmic nature peacefully abides unconditioned, and since unconditioned, without arising or ceasing. Since all the defilements do not appear, originally quiescent, the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa. For this reason, relying on the nature of the ultimate meaning manifested in the selfless nature of dharmas lacking inherent nature, I have explained with the secret intent, ‘All dharmas are completely without inherent nature, are without arising, without ceasing, are originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa’”
>>> 「復次，勝義生！非由有情界中諸有情類，別觀遍計所執自性為自性故，亦非由彼別觀依他起自性及圓成實自性為自性故，我立三種無自性性；然由有情於依他起自性及圓成實自性上，增益遍計所執自性故，我立三種無自性性。
<<< “Furthermore, Paramārathasamudgata! I do not propose these three kinds of natures without inherent nature among different sentient beings in the world, because some would regard the nature of being grasped as something circumscribed as having inherent nature, or they would regard the nature of arising in dependence upon another or the nature of complete, perfect reality as having inherent nature. Rather, it is because sentient beings superimpose the nature of being grasped as something circumscribed upon the nature of arising in dependence upon another and the nature of complete, perfect reality that I propose three kinds of natures without inherent nature.”
>>> 「由遍計所執自性相故，彼諸有情於依他起自性及圓成實自性中，隨起言說。如如隨起言說如是如是，由言說熏習心故、由言說隨覺故、由言說隨眠故，於依他起自性及圓成實自性中，執著遍計所執自性相。
<<< “Due to the characteristic of having the inherent nature of being grasped as something circumscribed, all those sentient beings within the inherent nature of arising in dependence upon another and the inherent nature of complete perfect reality create explanations. And so, creating explanations like this about such and such, because the explanations condition their minds, because their awareness conforms to the explanations, because they are lulled by the explanations, within the nature of arising in dependence upon another and the nature of complete perfect reality they become attached to the characteristic of having the nature of being grasped as something circumscribed.”
>>> 「如如執著如是如是，於依他起自性及圓成實自性上，執著遍計所執自性；由是因緣，生當來世依他起自性；由此因緣，或為煩惱雜染所染、或為業雜染所染、或為生雜染所染，於生死中長時馳騁、長時流轉，無有休息，或在那落迦、或在傍生、或在餓鬼、或在天上、或在阿素洛、或在人中，受諸苦惱。
<<< “As such, being attached to such and such, they are attached to the inherent nature of being grasped as something circumscribed that is superimposed upon the inherent nature of arising in dependence upon another and the inherent nature of complete perfect reality. Due to co-dependent origination, they will be born in lives to come with the inherent nature of arising in dependence upon another. Due to this co-dependent origination, they become tainted with the taint of the afflictions, tainted with the taint of karma, tainted with the taint of birth, and they gallop about through birth & death (samsara) for a long time, floating about endlessly for a long time, perhaps in a naraka (’hell realm’), or as an animal, or hungry ghost, or in the heavens above, or with the asura, or among humans, receiving all kinds of suffering.”
>>> 「復次，勝義生！若諸有情從本已來，未種善根，未清淨障，未成熟相續，未多修勝解，未能積集福德、智慧二種資糧。我為彼故，依生無自性性宣說諸法。彼聞是已，能於一切緣生行中，隨分解了無常、無恒，是不安隱變壞法已，於一切行，心生怖畏，深起厭患；心生怖畏，深厭患已，遮止諸惡，於諸惡法能不造作，於諸善法能勤修習。習善因故，未種善根能種善根，未清淨障能令清淨，未熟相續能令成熟。由此因緣，多修勝解，亦多積集福德、智慧二種資糧。
<<< “Furthermore, Paramārathasamudgata! If there are those people who have not yet planted roots of goodness, who have not yet purified obstacles, who have not yet matured their continuity (’mindstream’ citta-santāna), who have not yet cultivated liberation, who have not yet been able to accumulate merit and wisdom, the two kinds of ‘supplies’ (saṃbhāra), it is for them that I explain the Dharma relying upon the nature of arising lacking inherent nature. When they hear this, they will be able to understand, in part, that all conditionings (saṃskāra), which are dependently co-arisen, are impermanent, inconstant, not comforting, grievously transient, and destructive. Then their minds will produce deep dread and detestation for all conditioned states. When this has happened, then they will reject all evil. When they no longer do evil, they will be able to cultivate and practice good. And, practicing good, they will be able to plant roots of goodness not previously planted, they will be able to purify obstacles not previously purified, they will be able to mature their continuities not previously matured. Because of this they will cultivate liberation and accumulate the two ‘supplies’ of merit and wisdom.”
>>> 「彼雖如是種諸善根，乃至積集福德、智慧二種資糧；然於生無自性性中，未能如實了知相無自性性及二種勝義無自性性。於一切行未能正厭、未正離欲，未正解脫，未遍解脫煩惱雜染、未遍解脫諸業雜染、未遍解脫諸生雜染。如來為彼更說法要，謂相無自性性及勝義無自性性。為欲令其於一切行能正厭故、正離欲故、正解脫故，超過一切煩惱雜染故、超過一切業雜染故、超過一切生雜染故。
<<< Even though they cultivate good roots and accumulate the two kinds of ‘supplies’, merit and wisdom, they are nevertheless as yet unable to truly know the nature of characteristics lacking inherent existence and the two kinds of natures of ultimate meaning lacking inherent existence. So they cannot yet truly be disaffected with all conditionings and are not yet truly detached from desire or yet truly liberated. They are not yet totally liberated from the taint of affliction, they are not yet totally liberated from the taint of karma, and they are not yet totally liberated from the taint of birth. It is for them that the Thus Come One has gone on to explain the Dharma in terms of the nature of characteristics lacking inherent nature and the nature of ultimate meaning lacking inherent nature. It is from a desire for them to be correctly disaffected with all conditionings, so that they can be correctly freed from desire and correctly liberated, so that they can transcend the taint of the afflictions, the taint of karma, and the taint of birth.”
>>> 「彼聞如是所說法已，於生無自性性中，能正信解相無自性性及勝義無自性性，簡擇思惟，如實通達；於依他起自性中，能不執著遍計所執自性相。由言說不熏習智故、由言說不隨覺智故、由言說離隨眠智故，能滅依他起相；於現法中智力所持，能永斷滅當來世因。由此因緣，於一切行能正厭患、能正離欲、能正解脫，能遍解脫煩惱、業、生三種雜染。
<<< “After they have heard an explanation of the Dharma like this, they will be able to correctly believe and understand the nature of characteristics lacking inherent nature and the nature of ultimate truth lacking inherent nature within the nature of arising lacking inherent existence, pondering, thinking, and really penetrating [it]. Within the nature of arising in dependence upon another, they are able to not cling to the inherent nature of the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed. Due to wisdom not conditioned by language, due to awakened wisdom not conforming to language, due to wisdom freed from inclinations toward language, they
are able to bring to cessation the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another. Sustained by the wisdom power of this Dharma, they will eternally be able to sever all causes for future [rebirths] forever. Due to this dependent origination, they will be able to correctly detest all conditioning, they will be able to correctly sever all desires and be correctly liberated. They will be able to be entirely liberated from the three taints of affliction, karma, and birth.”
>>> 「復次，勝義生！諸聲聞乘種性有情，亦由此道此行迹故，證得無上安隱涅槃。諸獨覺乘種性有情、諸如來乘種性有情，亦由此道此行迹故，證得無上安隱涅槃。一切聲聞、獨覺、菩薩，皆共此一妙清淨道，皆同此一究竟清淨，更無第二。我依此故，密意說言：『唯有一乘。』非於一切有情界中，無有種種有情種性，或鈍根性、或中根性、或利根性有情差別。
<<< “Furthermore, Paramārathasamudgata! All those sentient beings who belong to the Voice Hearer vehicle, because they follow this path, will realize unsurpassed, quiescent cessation. All sentient beings who belong to the Solitary Enlightened One vehicle or to the vehicle of the Thus Come One, because they follow this path, will realize unsurpassed, quiescent cessation. For all Voice Hearers, Solitary Enlightened Ones, and bodhisattvas, this is the one wondrous path of purification. This is the one ultimate purification. There is no second. It is with this secret intent that I have explained, ‘There is only one vehicle.’ It is not that in the realm of sentient beings there are not sentient beings of various different lineages, for some are dull in understanding, some are not so dull, and some are
quick in understanding.”
>>> 「善男子！若一向趣寂聲聞種性，雖蒙諸佛施設種種勇猛加行方便化導，終不能令當坐道場證得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提。何以故？由彼本來唯有下劣種性故、一向慈悲薄弱故、一向怖畏眾苦故。由彼一向慈悲薄弱，是故一向棄背利益諸眾生事；由彼一向怖畏眾苦，是故一向棄背發起諸行所作。我終不說一向棄背利益眾生事者、一向棄背發起諸行所作者，當坐道場，能得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提，是故說彼名為一向趣寂聲聞。若迴向菩提聲聞種性補特伽羅，我亦異門說為菩薩。何以故？彼既解脫煩惱障已，若蒙諸佛等覺悟時，於所知障，其心亦可當得解脫。由彼最初為自利益，修行加行脫煩惱障，是故如來施設彼為聲聞種性。
<<< “Kulaputra! Someone turned exclusively toward the quiescence of the Voice Hearer lineage, even if they were to be skillfully led by the courageous perseverance of all the Buddhas, they would be unable to be led to sit upon the site of enlightenment and realize anuttarā-saṃyak-saṃbodhi. How so? This is so because from their origin they possess only an inferior lineage, because their compassion has been weak, because they have lived in fear of suffering. Since their compassion has been weak, they have turned their backs upon deeds that benefit and gladden all sentient beings. Since they have lived in fear of suffering, they have turned their backs upon engendering any conditioning. I have never taught that one who turns their back upon deeds to benefit and gladden all sentient beings, who turns their back upon engendering conditioning, will sit upon the site of enlightenment and realize anuttarā-saṃyak-saṃbodhi. Therefore, I teach that such persons are exclusively turned toward the quiescence of the Voice Hearer lineage. If one transfers (pariṇāmanā) the pudgala (personality) of being of the Voice Hearer linage toward bodhi, I would then describe that as being a bodhisattva. How so? Having already been liberated from the hindrance of the afflictions, when they receive the Awakened Equality of all Buddhas, their mind will also be able to attain liberation from all hindrances of knowledge. Because they first cultivated practice for their own benefit, practices liberating from the hindrance of the afflictions, for this reason the Thus Come One describes them as being of the Voice Hearer lineage.
>>> 「復次，勝義生！如是於我善說善制法毘奈耶，最極清淨意樂所說善教法中，諸有情類意解種種差別可得。善男子！如來但依如是三種無自性性，由深密意，於所宣說不了義經，以隱密相說諸法要，謂一切法皆無自性、無生、無滅、本來寂靜、自性涅槃。
<<< “Furthermore, Paramārathasamudgata! Various differences can be found in people's understandings of my well-explained, well-ordered Dharma and Vinaya; good Dharma explained with the purest intent. Kulaputra! The Thus Come One only relies on three kinds of nature lacking inherent nature like this in explaining the import of all Dharma using ‘secret characteristics’ with a profound, secret intent, throughout the proclaimed sutras of incomplete meaning, which is to say, that all dharmas are completely without inherent nature, are without arising, without ceasing, are originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa.”
>>> 「於是經中，若諸有情已種上品善根、已清淨諸障、已成熟相續、已多修勝解，已能積集上品福德、智慧資糧，彼若聽聞如是法已，於我甚深密意言說，如實解了，於如是法，深生信解，於如是義，以無倒慧，如實通達。依此通達善修習故，速疾能證最極究竟；亦於我所深生淨信，知是如來、應、正等覺於一切法現正等覺。
<<< “Regarding what is in this sutra, if all the sentient beings who already have superior, good roots, who have already purified all hindrances, who have already matured continuities, who have already cultivated liberation, who have already been able to accumulate the ‘supplies’ of superior merit and wisdom, when they hear Dharma like this, they will truly understand the secret intent of my words and will give rise to a profound faith in and understanding of this Dharma, for they will truly penetrate its meaning with infallible understanding. Because they rely on this good cultivation of penetration, they will quickly be able to realize the ultimate stage and, because of their profoundly engendered pure faith in me, they will know this is the Thus Come One, Worthy One, Correctly Awakened One manifesting the correct awakening of all dharmas.”
>>> 「若諸有情，已種上品善根、已清淨諸障、已成熟相續、已多修勝解，未能積集上品福德、智慧資糧。其性質直，是質直類，雖無力能思擇廢立，而不安住自見取中。彼若聽聞如是法已，於我甚深祕密言說，雖無力能如實解了，然於此法能生勝解，發清淨信，信此經典，是如來說，是其甚深，顯現甚深，空性相應，難見難悟，不可尋思，非諸尋思所行境界、微細詳審聰明智者之所解了。於此經典所說義中，自輕而住，作如是言：『諸佛菩提為最甚深，諸法法性亦最甚深，唯佛如來能善了達，非是我等所能解了。諸佛如來，為彼種種勝解有情，轉正法教；諸佛如來無邊智見，我等智見猶如牛跡。』於此經典，雖能恭敬，為他宣說，書寫護持，披閱，流布，殷重供養，受誦溫習；然猶未能以其修相發起加行，是故於我甚深密意所說言辭，不能通達。由此因緣，彼諸有情，亦能增長福德、智慧二種資糧，於彼相續未成熟者，亦能成熟。
<<< “If all the sentient beings who already have planted superior, good roots, who have already purified all hindrances, who have already matured continuities, who have already cultivated liberations, [but] who have not yet been able to accumulate the ‘supplies’ of superior merit and wisdom, [yet] their disposition is upright. Someone with this type of upright disposition, while without the power to be able to think discerningly about propositions, does not dwell fixed in attachment to their own views. When they hear Dharma like this, they will not have the power to be able to truly understand the secret intent of my words, yet they are able to bring about a supreme understanding of this Dharma, generate pure faith and believe in this sutra, ‘This is the teaching of the Thus Come One, this is that most profound revelation, that most profound characteristic of the nature of emptiness that is difficult to see, difficult to comprehend, incapable of being rationalized nor within any sphere of rationalization, something subtle and refined understood only by the brilliantly wise. They abide in this sutra with humility and say: ‘The bodhi of all the Buddhas is profound indeed! All dharmas dharmic nature is also profound indeed! Only the Buddha Tathagatas are able to understand it well, for it is not something we are able to understand. For the sake of sentient beings of various dispositions, all the Buddha Tathagatas have turned the Wheel of the Correct Dharma, for the wisdom and insight of all Buddha Tathagatas is infinite, while our wisdom and insight follows in their wake.’ Although they are able to revere this sutra and declare it to others, to copy it and protect it, to unroll it and disseminate it, to venerate and honor it, to recite it and review it, yet they will still be incapable of the effort of practicing it, and thus they will be incapable of penetrating the underlying intent of my words. But those sentient beings will be able to increase the ‘supplies’ of merit and wisdom, and they will be able to mature the continuities [of their consciousnesses] that have not been matured.
>>> 「若諸有情，廣說乃至未能積集上品福德、智慧資糧，性非質直，非質直類，雖有力能思擇廢立，而復安住自見取中。彼若聽聞如是法已，於我甚深密意言說不能如實解了。於如是法雖生信解，然於其義隨言執著，謂一切法決定皆無自性，決定不生不滅，決定本來寂靜，決定自性涅槃。由此因緣，於一切法獲得無見及無相見。由得無見無相見故，撥一切相皆是無相，誹撥諸法遍計所執相、依他起相、圓成實相。何以故？由有依他起相及圓成實相故，遍計所執相方可施設；若於依他起相及圓成實相見為無相，彼亦誹撥遍計所執相，是故說彼誹撥三相。雖於我法起於法想，而非義中起於義想；由於我法起法想故，及非義中起義想故，於是法中持為是法，於非義中持為是義。彼雖於法起信解故，福德增長；然於非義起執著故，退失智慧；智慧退故，退失廣大無量善法。
<<< “If all the sentient beings who, as already explained up to not yet being able to accumulate the ‘supplies’ of superior merit and wisdom, [but] their disposition is not upright, and although they do have the ability to think discerning about propositions, yet, abiding in their own views, if they hear Dharma like this, they will be unable truly to understand the secret intent of my words. Even if they were to bring about faith and understanding in Dharma like this, they would only be clinging to the words that express the meaning, that is: that all dharmas are completely without inherent nature, are without arising, without ceasing, are originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa.
Consequently, they take up the view of nihilism and the nonexistence of all characteristics. Due to this view of nihilism and the nonexistence of all characteristics, they negate all characteristics as lacking characteristics, and erroneously negate the characteristics of all dharmas being grasped as something circumscribed, the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another, and the characteristic of complete perfect reality. How so? It is only because of the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another and the characteristic of complete perfect reality the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed can be designated. If, then, in dispensing with and negating the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed, they regard the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another and the characteristic of complete perfect reality as lacking characteristics, they in fact dispense with and negate all three characteristic patterns. They do form concepts about my Dharma, but, in their negation of meaning, they do not form concepts of its meaning. Because, while forming concepts of my Dharma, in their negation of meaning, they do not form concepts of its meaning. They do maintain this Dharma, but they do not maintain its meaning. Nevertheless, because they have engendered faith and understanding in regard to this Dharma, their merit will increase, but they will turn away from and lose wisdom because they engender clinging to what is meaningless. Because they turn away from wisdom, they will lose that wide, immeasurable good Dharma.”
>>> 「復有有情，從他聽聞，謂法為法，非義為義，若隨其見，彼即於法起於法想，於非義中起於義想，執法為法、非義為義。由此因緣，當知同彼退失善法。若有有情不隨其見，從彼欻聞一切諸法皆無自性、無生、無滅、本來寂靜、自性涅槃，便生恐怖，生恐怖已，作如是言：『此非佛語，是魔所說。』作此解已，於是經典，誹謗、毀罵。由此因緣，獲大衰損，觸大業障。由是緣故，我說若有於一切相起無相見，於非義中宣說為義，是起廣大業障方便；由彼陷墜無量眾生，令其獲得大業障故。
<<< “Yet other sentient beings hear from them and take what is called the Dharma as the Dharma, and what is not meaningful as meaning. If they follow that view, they will give rise to a perception of dharmas (dharma-saṃjñā) about the Dharma, and from what is not meaning they will give rise to a perception of meaning, taking Dharma as the Dharma, and what is not meaningful as meaning. From this interdependence, you should know, they likewise turn away from and lose the Good Dharma. If there are sentient beings who do not follow that view, who suddenly hear from them, ‘All dharmas are completely without inherent nature, are without arising, without ceasing, are originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa’ and they become fearful. Having become fearful they say things like, ‘This is not what the Buddha said. These are the words of Mara.’ Having thought like this about this sutra, they refute (apavāda) and slander [it]. Due to these conditions, I have explained, if one has the view that all characteristics are without characteristics, and from what is not meaningful explains it to be meaningful, this brings about a immensely great karmic hindrance (upaya?), and because they beguile countless sentient beings, they cause them also to attain great karmic hindrances.”
>>> 「善男子！若諸有情，未種善根、未清淨障、未熟相續、無多勝解，未集福德、智慧資糧。性非質直，非質直類，雖有力能思擇廢立，而常安住自見取中。彼若聽聞如是法已，不能如實解我甚深密意言說，亦於此法不生信解，於是法中起非法想，於是義中起非義想。於是法中執為非法，於是義中執為非義，唱如是言：『此非佛語，是魔所說。』作此解已，於是經典，誹謗毀罵，撥為虛偽，以無量門，毀滅摧伏如是經典，於諸信解此經典者起怨家想。彼先為諸業障所障，由此因緣，復為如是業障所障，如是業障，初易施設，乃至齊於百千俱胝那庾多劫，無有出期。
<<< “Kulaputra! If all the sentient beings who have not yet planted superior, good roots, who have not yet purified all hindrances, who have not yet matured continuities, without much liberation, who have not yet been able to accumulate the ‘supplies’ of superior merit and wisdom, without an upright disposition. The type of person without an upright disposition, without the power to be able to think discerningly about propositions, dwelling fixed in attachment to their own views.  When they hear Dharma like this, they will not be able to truly understand the secret intent of my words, and do not give rise to liberating faith in this Dharma. They will form the perception that this Dharma is not Dharma and that this meaning is not meaning. Clinging to the idea that this Dharma is not Dharma and that this meaning is not meaning, they announce their evaluation, saying: ‘This is not what the Buddha said. These are the words of Mara.’ Having thought like this about this sutra, they refute and slander, discard it as false, and destroy and refute it in innumerable ways,
considering all those who have faith in it to be their enemies. They are already hindered by their karma, and because of that are now further hindered by this karma. This karmic hindrance is easily set up at first, but eventually there is no escape for hundreds of thousands of millions of kotis of nayutas of kalpas.”
>>> 「善男子！如是於我善說善制法、毘奈耶，最極清淨意樂所說善教法中，有如是等諸有情類意解種種差別可得。」
<<< “Kulaputra! Like this, various differences can be found in people's understandings of my well-explained, well-ordered Dharma and Vinaya; good Dharma explained with the purest intent.”
>>> 爾時，世尊欲重宣此義，而說頌曰：
<<< Then, the World Honored One, to emphasize the meaning of this, said in verse:
>>> 一切諸法皆無性，　　
無生無滅本來寂，　
諸法自性恒涅槃。　　
誰有智言無密意？
<<< Every dharma is completely without nature,
Without arising, without ceasing, originally quiescent,
The inherent nature of all dharmas is ever Nirvāṇa.
Who with wisdom could say there is no secret intent?
>>> 相生勝義無自性，　　
如是我皆已顯示；　
若不知佛此密意，　　
失壞正道不能往！
<<< Characteristics, arising, and ultimate meaning lack inherent nature,
Thus is what I have revealed,
If one does not know the secret intent of the Buddha,
They miss the correct path and are unable to go on!
>>> 依諸淨道清淨者，　　
惟依此一無第二，　
故於其中立一乘，　　
非有情性無差別。
<<< The pure who rely on the pure paths
Rely only upon this, there is no second,
Therefore within this is established the Single Vehicle,
Yet it is not that the nature of sentient beings is without differentiation
>>> 眾生界中無量生，　　
惟度一身趣寂滅，　
大悲勇猛證涅槃，　　
不捨眾生甚難得！
<<< Immeasurable beings within the realms of sentient beings,
Deliver only one life [i.e. themselves] to tranquility,
[While] those of great compassion and courage who realize Nirvana
And do not relinquish sentient beings are most rare to encounter!
>>> 微妙難思無漏界，　　
於中解脫等無差，　
一切義成離惑苦，　　
二種異說謂常樂。」
<<< In the subtle, difficult to conceive realm of no outflows
Liberation is equanimous, without differentiation;
All meaning achieves transcendence of confusion and suffering,
Duality and difference, and is what is called eternal bliss.
>>> 爾時，勝義生菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！諸佛如來密意語言，甚奇！希有！乃至微妙最微妙！甚深最甚深！難通達最難通達！
<<< At that time, Paramārathasamudgata said to the Buddha, “World-Honored One! The secret intent of the words of all Buddha Tathagatas is rare, most indeed! It is subtle, most subtle! It is profound, most profound! It is difficult to penetrate, most difficult to penetrate!”
>>> 「如是我今領解世尊所說義者：若於分別所行遍計所執相所依行相中，假名安立以為色蘊，或自性相、或差別相；假名安立為色蘊生、為色蘊滅、及為色蘊永斷、遍知，或自性相、或差別相，是名遍計所執相。世尊依此施設諸法相無自性性。若即分別所行遍計所執相所依行相，是名依他起相。世尊依此施設諸法生無自性性，及一分勝義無自性性。如是我今領解世尊所說義者：若即於此分別所行遍計所執相所依行相中，由遍計所執相不成實故，即此自性無自性性法無我真如清淨所緣，是名圓成實相。世尊依此施設一分勝義無自性性。如於色蘊，如是，於餘蘊皆應廣說；如於諸蘊如是，於十二處，一一處中皆應廣說；於十二有支，一一支中皆應廣說；於四種食，一一食中皆應廣說；於六界、十八界，一一界中皆應廣說。
<<< “As I understand the meaning of what the Buddha has said: if, among the differentiated conditioned characteristics (saṃskāra-lakṣaṇa) upon which are based the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed one establishes conventional names like the aggregate of form, or its characteristic of inherent nature, or its differentiating characteristics, and establishes conventional names like the birth of the aggregate of form, the extinction of the aggregate of form, the eternal severance and total knowledge of the aggregate of form, or their characteristic of inherent nature, or their differentiating characteristics, this is called the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed. The World-Honored One defines the nature of all dharmas’ characteristics lacking inherent nature on this basis.”

“If it is just the differentiated conditioned characteristics upon which are based the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed, this is called the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another. The World-Honored One defines the nature of the arising of all dharmas lacking inherent nature and one part of the nature of ultimate meaning lacking inherent nature on this basis.”

“As I understand the meaning of what the Buddha has said, if it is just among differentiated conditioned characteristics that the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed is based, and, because the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed amounts to nothing real, and this condition of the inherent nature of something (dharma) lacking inherent nature, without self, truly thus and pure, this is called the characteristic of complete, perfect reality. The World-Honored One defines one part of the nature of ultimate truth lacking inherent nature on this basis. The aggregate of form and the other aggregates should be explained like this. Just as all the aggregates are, the twelve bases, each of the bases should be explained like this. This is how each of the twelve limbs of existence should be explained. This is how each of the four sustenances should be explained, the six realms, the eighteen realms, each of the realms should be explained like this.”
>>> 「如是我今領解世尊所說義者：若於分別所行遍計所執相所依行相中，假名安立以為苦諦，苦諦遍知，或自性相、或差別相，是名遍計所執相。世尊依此施設諸法相無自性性。若即分別所行遍計所執相所依行相，是名依他起相。世尊依此施設諸法生無自性性，及一分勝義無自性性。如是我今領解世尊所說義者：若即於此分別所行遍計所執相所依行相中，由遍計所執相不成實故，即此自性無自性性法無我真如清淨所緣，是名圓成實相。世尊依此施設一分勝義無自性性。如於苦諦如是，於餘諦皆應廣說。如於聖諦如是，於諸念住、正斷、神足、根、力、覺支、道支中，一一皆應廣說。
<<< “As I understand the meaning of what the Buddha has said, if, among the differentiated conditioned characteristics upon which are based the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed one establishes conventional names like the Truth of Suffering, the total knowledge of the Truth of Suffering, or its characteristic of inherent nature, or its differentiating characteristics, this is called the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed. The World-Honored One defines the nature of all dharmas’ characteristics lacking inherent nature on this basis.”

“If it is just the differentiated conditioned characteristics upon which are based the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed, this is called the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another. The World-Honored One defines the nature of the arising of all dharmas lacking inherent nature and one part of the nature of ultimate meaning lacking inherent nature on this basis.”

“As I understand the meaning of what the Buddha has said, if it is just among differentiated conditioned characteristics that the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed is based, and, because the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed amounts to nothing real, and this condition of the inherent nature of something (dharma) lacking inherent nature, without self, truly thus and pure, this is called the characteristic of complete, perfect reality. The World-Honored One defines one part of the nature of ultimate truth lacking inherent nature on this basis. The Truth of Suffering and the other Truths should be explained like this. As the Noble Truths are like this, everything within the Foundations of Mindfulness, Right Effort, the Spiritual Steps (ṛddhipāda), the Faculties, Powers, Factors of Awakening, and Factors of the Path, each and every one should be explained like this.
>>> 「如是我今領解世尊所說義者：若於分別所行遍計所執相所依行相中，假名安立以為正定，及為正定能治所治，若正修未生令生，生已堅住不忘，倍修增長廣大，或自性相、或差別相，是名遍計所執相。世尊依此施設諸法相無自性性。若即分別所行遍計所執相所依行相，是名依他起相。世尊依此施設諸法生無自性性，及一分勝義無自性性。如是我今領解世尊所說義者：若即於此分別所行遍計所執相所依行相中，由遍計所執相不成實故，即此自性無自性性法無我真如清淨所緣，是名圓成實相。世尊依此施設諸法一分勝義無自性性。
<<< “As I understand the meaning of what the Buddha has said, if, among the differentiated conditioned characteristics upon which are based the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed one establishes conventional names like Right Samadhi; what Right Samadhi is able to control; what it gives rise to, which has never arisen before, if correctly cultivated; having arisen, its not being forgotten through steadfast abiding; its expansion, increase and growth through redoubled cultivation; its characteristic of inherent nature, its differentiating characteristics, this is called the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed. The World-Honored One defines the nature of all dharmas’ characteristics lacking inherent nature on this basis.”

“If it is just the differentiated conditioned characteristics upon which are based the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed, this is called the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another. The World-Honored One defines the nature of the arising of all dharmas lacking inherent nature and one part of the nature of ultimate meaning lacking inherent nature on this basis.”

“As I understand the meaning of what the Buddha has said, if it is just among differentiated conditioned characteristics that the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed is based, and, because the characteristic of being grasped as something circumscribed amounts to nothing real, and this condition of the inherent nature of something (dharma) lacking inherent nature, without self, truly thus and pure, this is called the characteristic of complete, perfect reality. The World-Honored One defines one part of the nature of ultimate truth lacking inherent nature on this basis.”
>>> 「世尊！譬如毘濕縛藥，一切散藥、仙藥方中，皆應安處。如是，世尊！依此諸法皆無自性、無生、無滅、本來寂靜、自性涅槃，無自性性了義言教，遍於一切不了義經，皆應安處。
<<< “World-Honored One! Just as dried ginger is placed into all effective medicines, it will totally be found there. Just so, World-Honored One! This teaching based upon the complete meaning that all dharmas are completely without inherent nature, are without arising, without ceasing, are originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa, of a nature lacking inherent nature pervades throughout sutras of incomplete meaning, it will totally be found there.”
>>> 「世尊！如彩畫地，遍於一切彩畫事業皆同一味，或青、或黃、或赤、或白，復能顯發彩畫事業。如是，世尊！依此諸法皆無自性廣說乃至自性涅槃，無自性性了義言教，遍於一切不了義經，皆同一味，復能顯發彼諸經中所不了義。
<<< “World-Honored One! Just like the background of a colorful painting pervades throughout all the colors of the painted work with an identical, single ’flavor’ (or hue), whether blue, yellow, red, or white, and is then able to reveal the paintwork. Like this, World-Honored One! This teaching based upon the complete meaning that all dharmas are completely without inherent nature, are without arising, without ceasing, are originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa, of a nature lacking inherent nature pervades throughout sutras of incomplete meaning, completely with an identical, single flavor, and is then able to reveal that within all the sutras of incomplete meaning.
>>> 「世尊！譬如一切成熟珍羞諸餅果內，投之熟酥，更生勝味。如是，世尊！依此諸法皆無自性，廣說乃至自性涅槃，無自性性了義言教，置於一切不了義經，生勝歡喜。
<<< “World-Honored One! Just as the addition of warm cheese to cooked delicacies like cakes or fruit produces a greater flavor. Like this, World-Honored One! This teaching based upon the complete meaning that all dharmas are completely without inherent nature, as explained above, are originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa, of a nature lacking inherent nature, added to the sutras of incomplete meaning, produces greater joy.”
>>> 「世尊！譬如虛空遍一切處，皆同一味，不障一切所作事業。如是，世尊！依此諸法皆無自性廣說乃至自性涅槃，無自性性了義言教，遍於一切不了義經，皆同一味，不障一切聲聞、獨覺及諸大乘所修事業。」說是語已。
<<< “World-Honored One! Just as space pervades everywhere, completely with an identical, single flavor, not obstructing any activity. Like this, World-Honored One! This teaching based upon the complete meaning that all dharmas are completely without inherent nature, as explained above, are originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa, of a nature lacking inherent nature, pervades throughout the sutras of incomplete meaning, completely with an identical, single flavor, not obstructing any Voice Hearer, Solitary Enlightened One or all the activities of the Mahayana.” This is what he said.
>>> 爾時，世尊歎勝義生菩薩曰：「善哉，善哉！善男子！汝今乃能善解如來所說甚深密意言義；復於此義善作譬喻，所謂世間毘濕縛藥，雜彩畫地，熟酥，虛空。勝義生！如是，如是！更無有異！如是，如是！汝應受持。」
<<< Then, the World-Honored One praised Paramārathasamudgata saying, “Excellent, excellent! Kulaputra! You have now been able to well understand the secret intent of the words of the Thus Come One.  Also the meaning was well done with the similes of the dried ginger, the background of a colorful painting, the warm cheese, and empty space. Paramārathasamudgata! Just so, just! Not different at all. Just so, just so! It is exactly as you have remembered. ”
>>> 爾時勝義生菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！初於一時在婆羅痆斯仙人墮處，施鹿林中，惟為發趣聲聞乘者，以四諦相轉正法輪。雖是甚奇、甚為希有，一切世間諸天、人等，先無有能如法轉者。而於彼時所轉法輪，有上、有容，是未了義，是諸諍論安足處所。
<<< At that time, Paramarthasamudgata Bodhisattva addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! “In the beginning, in the country of Benares at the resort of seers, in the Deer Park, the World-honored One first turned the Wheel of the Correct Dharma by the characteristics of the Four Truths only for those generating the Voice Hearer Vehicle. This was marvelous and most rare, Dharma such as nobody, whether gods or humans, had been able to turn in the world before. However, at the time of this turning, there was something superior, there was room, and this lack of understanding led to all kind of interpretations and occasioned controversy.”
>>> 「世尊！在昔第二時中，惟為發趣修大乘者，依一切法皆無自性、無生、無滅、本來寂靜、自性涅槃，以隱密相轉正法輪。雖更甚奇、甚為希有，而於彼時所轉法輪，亦是有上、有所容受，猶未了義，是諸諍論安足處所。
<<< “World-Honored One! During the second period of time, only for those generating the cultivation of the Great Vehicle, [you] turned the Wheel of the Correct Dharma by characteristics with a secret intent based upon all dharmas being completely without inherent nature, without arising, without ceasing, being originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa. This was marvelous and most rare, however, at the time of this turning, there was also something superior, there was still room, and this lack of understanding led to all kind of interpretations and occasioned controversy.”
>>> 「世尊！於今第三時中，普為發趣一切乘者，依一切法皆無自性、無生、無滅、本來寂靜、自性涅槃、無自性性，以顯了相轉正法輪。第一甚奇、最為希有。于今世尊所轉法輪無上無容，是真了義，非諸諍論安足處所。
<<< “World-Honored One! Now, during the third period, universally for those generating every vehicle, you turn the Wheel of the Correct Dharma by revelatory characteristics based upon the nature of all dharmas being completely without inherent nature, without arising, without ceasing, being originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa, lacking inherent nature. The most marvelous, absolutely most rare! No turning of any Dharma Wheel in the world is superior, there is no room. This is the meaning of truth, without interpretation or place for controversy.”
>>> 「世尊！若善男子或善女人，於此如來依一切法皆無自性、無生、無滅、本來寂靜、自性涅槃，所說甚深了義言教，聞已信解、書寫、護持、供養、流布、受誦、修習、如理思惟，以其修相發起加行，生幾所福？」說是語已。
<<< “World-Honored One! If virtuous men or virtuous women, upon hearing such a profound teaching based upon the complete meaning that all dharmas are completely without inherent nature, are without arising, without ceasing, are originally quiescent with the inherent nature of Nirvāṇa, believe in it with understanding, copy, protect, honor, and spread it about, reciting and practicing it with logic and reason, how much merit would they bring about by their having generated the cultivation of such practice?” This is what he said.
>>> 爾時，世尊告勝義生菩薩曰：「勝義生！是善男子或善女人，其所生福無量無數難可喻知，吾今為汝略說少分。如爪上土比大地土，百分不及一，千分不及一，百千分不及一，數算、計喻、鄔波尼殺曇分亦不及一。或如牛跡中水比四大海水，百分不及一，廣說乃至鄔波尼殺曇分亦不及一。如是，於諸不了義經，聞已信解、廣說乃至以其修相發起加行所獲功德，比此所說了義經教，聞已信解所集功德，廣說乃至以其修相發起加行所集功德，百分不及一，廣說乃至鄔波尼殺曇分亦不及一。」說是語已。
<<< At that time, the World-Honored One said to Paramarthasamudgata Bodhisattva, “Paramarthasamudgata! The merit produced by these virtuous men or virtuous women would be immeasruable, incalcuable, difficult to know. I can but suggest a small part of it for you, like a bit of dirt on one’s fingernail in comparison to the earth. It does not amount to one-hundredth part, nor one-thousandth part, nor one-hundred-thousandth part. It cannot be reckoned as even the tiniest part. Or it is like the pool in a cow’s tracks compared to the waters of the four great oceans, which does not reach one-hundredth part, etc. Such would be the merit attained by hearing and believing and by the effort expended to meditate upon the teaching of the sutras of incomplete meaning. But even this does not come to one-hundredth, not to the tiniest part of the merit attained by hearing and believing and by the effort expended in meditating upon this sutra of complete meaning.” This is what he said.
>>> 爾時，勝義生菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！於是解深密法門中，當何名此教？我當云何奉持？」
<<< At that time, Paramarthasamudgata Bodhisattva said to the Buddha, “World-Honored One! How should we call this teaching from within this dharma door that reveals the profound secret?”
>>> 佛告勝義生菩薩曰：「善男子！此名勝義了義之教；於此勝義了義之教，汝當奉持。」
<<< The Buddha told Paramarthasamudgata, “Paramarthasamudgata! This is called the Teaching of the Complete Meaning of Supreme Meaning. You should uphold this Teaching of the Complete Meaning of Supreme Meaning.”
>>> 說此勝義了義教時，於大會中，有六百千眾生發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心；三百千聲聞遠塵離垢，於諸法中得法眼淨；一百五十千聲聞永盡諸漏心得解脫；七十五千菩薩得無生法忍。
<<< When this Complete Meaning of Supreme Meaning teaching was explained, six hundred thousand sentient beings in the great assembly generated anuttarā-saṃyak-saṃbodhi-citta; **three hundred thousand voice hearers removed themselves far from defilement and pollution and from this Dharma purified their Dharma Eye; one hundred fifty thousand voice hearers separated themselves definitively from all contaminated states of mind and attained liberation; and seventy-five thousand bodhisattvas attained the patience tolerance of birthlessness.

>>> 分別瑜伽
<<< Chapter 6 - Vikalpa Yoga ‘Differentiating Yoga’
>>> 爾時慈氏菩薩摩訶薩白佛言：「世尊！菩薩何依何住，於大乘中修奢摩他、毘鉢舍那？」
<<< At that time Maitreya Bodhisattva addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! What does the bodhisattva rely upon, how do they cultivate śamatha and vipaśyanā while abide within the Great Vehicle?”
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！當知菩薩法假安立，及不捨阿耨多羅三藐三菩提願，為依、為住，於大乘中修奢摩他、毘鉢舍那。」
<<< The Buddha told Maitreya Bodhisattva, “Kulaputra! You should know, the conventionally established Bodhisattva Dharma and not relinquishing the vow of anuttarā-saṃyak-saṃbodhi are the basis, are the abode of the cultivation of śamatha and vipaśyanā within the Great Vehicle.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「如世尊說四種所緣境事：一者、有分別影像所緣境事；二者、無分別影像所緣境事；三者、事邊際所緣境事；四者、所作成辦所緣境事。於此四中，幾是奢摩他所緣境事？幾是毘鉢舍那所緣境事？幾是俱所緣境事？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “As the World-Honored One has explained, there are four kinds of conditionally constructed (ālambana) objects: First, conditionally constructed objects with differentiated (vikalpa, or vibhajya, vibhaaga; parikalpana; divide, discriminate, discern, reason) images; second, conditionally constructed objects without differentiated images (nirābhāsa); third, conditionally constructed objects at the limit of objectification; and fourth, conditionally constructed objects that accomplish the Purpose (Convert the Basis, āśraya-pārivṛtti). Among these four, which are conditionally constructed objects of śamatha? Which are conditionally constructed objects of vipaśyanā? Which are conditionally constructed objects of both?”
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！一是奢摩他所緣境事，謂無分別影像；一是毘鉢舍那所緣境事，謂有分別影像；二是俱所緣境事，謂事邊際、所作成辦。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! One is a conditionally constructed object of śamatha, which is to say without differentiated images, one is a conditionally constructed object of vipaśyanā, which is to say with differentiated images. Two are the conditionally constructed object of both [śamatha and vipaśyanā] together, which are the limit of objectification and that which accomplishes the Purpose.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！云何菩薩依是四種奢摩他、毘鉢舍那所緣境事，能求奢摩他、能善毘鉢舍那？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! How is the bodhisattva able to seek śamatha and vipaśyanā based upon these four kinds of conditionally constructed objects of śamatha and vipaśyanā?
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！如我為諸菩薩所說法假安立，所謂契經、應誦、記別、諷誦、自說、因緣、譬喻、本事、本生、方廣、希法、論議。菩薩於此善聽、善受、言善通利、意善尋思、見善通達，即於如所善思惟法，獨處空閑作意思惟。復即於此能思惟心，內心相續，作意思惟。如是正行多安住故，起身輕安及心輕安，是名奢摩他。如是菩薩，能求奢摩他。彼由獲得身心輕安為所依故，即於如所善思惟法，內三摩地所行影像，觀察勝解捨離心相。即於如是三摩地影像所知義中，能正思擇、最極思擇，周遍尋思、周遍伺察，若忍、若樂、若慧、若見、若觀，是名毘鉢舍那。如是菩薩，能善毘鉢舍那。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! As I have explained, the Dharma in established conventions for all bodhisattvas in all of the sutras, the verses, the prophecies, the hymns, the sayings, the narratives, the parables, the previous actions, the previous lives, the extended discourses, the miraculous dharma (adbhutadharma), and the expositions, bodhisattvas listen well to [all of] this, receive it well, the words well understood, the ideas well considered, the view well penetrated, then, alone in a forested place, they think reflectively (manasikṛta) upon this well reasoned Dharma. Then, from this, they are able to reflect upon the mind, thinking reflectively upon the inner-mind ‘continuity’ (santati or ’mindstream’, citta-santāna). From the correct practice of a lot of peaceful abiding like this, there comes about bodily and mental ease. This is called śamatha. Like this, bodhisattvas are able to seek śamatha. With the attainment of ease of body and mind as a basis, they enter the saṃskār-ic imagery of samādhi from that well reasoned Dharma, observing and understanding free of the characteristics of mind, having abandoned them. Then, within knowledge of the meaning of the imagery of samādhi like this, they are able to correctly investigate, to investigate to the furthest extent, to ponder everything, to examine everything, whether patience, joy, wisdom, vision, or awakening, this is called vipaśyanā. Like this, a bodhisattva is able to vipaśyanā well.
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！若諸菩薩緣心為境，內思惟心，乃至未得身心輕安，所有作意，當名何等？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! If bodhisattvas take the conditioned mind as an object of internal reflection upon the mind but have not yet attained ease of body and mind, what should that way of thinking be called?”
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！非奢摩他作意，是隨順奢摩他勝解相應作意。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! That is not a śamatha way of thinking. That is thinking that goes along with śamatha with an understanding that it is something that should be done.”
>>> 「世尊！若諸菩薩乃至未得身心輕安，於如所思所有諸法內三摩地所緣影像作意思惟，如是作意，當名何等？」
<<< “World-Honored One! If bodhisattvas have not yet attained ease of body and mind, and they think reflectively upon the conditional images within samādhi that accord with all the Dharma upon which they have reflected, what should that way of thinking be called?”
>>> 「善男子！非毘鉢舍那作意，是隨順毘鉢舍那勝解相應作意。」
<<< “Kulaputra! That is not vipaśyanā thinking. That is thinking that goes along with vipaśyanā with an understanding that it is something that should be done.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！奢摩他道與毘鉢舍那道，當言有異？當言無異？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! The way of śamatha and the way of vipaśyanā, should it be said that they have a difference? Should it be said that there is no difference?”
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！當言非有異、非無異。何故非有異？以毘鉢舍那所緣境心為所緣故。何故非無異？有分別影像非所緣故。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! It should be said that they neither have a difference nor are they without difference. Why do they not have a difference? Because vipaśyanā has the conditionally objective mind as its condition. Why are they not without difference? Because there being differentiated images is not a [śamatha] condition.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！諸毘鉢舍那三摩地所行影像，彼與此心，當言有異？當言無異？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! All the saṃskār-ic imagery of vipaśyanā-samādhi, that and this mind, should it be said that they have a difference? Should it be said that there is no difference?”
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！當言無異。何以故？由彼影像唯是識故。善男子！我說識所緣，唯識所現故。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! It should be said that there is no difference. Why? Because those images are consciousness only. Kulaputra! I have said, the conditions of consciousness are only manifestations of consciousness.”
>>> 「世尊！若彼所行影像，即與此心無有異者，云何此心還見此心？」
<<< “World-Honored One! If that saṃskār-ic imagery and this mind are something without any difference, how does this mind ‘turn’ to see this mind?”
>>> 「善男子！此中無有少法能見少法；然即此心如是生時，即有如是影像顯現。善男子！如依善瑩清淨鏡面，以質為緣還見本質，而謂我今見於影像，及謂離質別有所行影像顯現。如是此心生時，相似有異三摩地所行影像顯現。」
<<< ‘Kulaputra! Herein there is not the slightest dharma able to see the slightest dharma. When a mind such as this arises, then saṃskār-ic imagery like this appears. Kulaputra! It is like seeing something in the clean, well polished face of a mirror, by which the object conditionally appears to ‘turn’ to see the original object, and it is said, I now see an image, and it is said that, apart from the object, there is the saṃskār-ic image that has appeared. Like this, when this mind arises, it appears as if there are differences in the saṃskār-ic imagery that appear in samādhi.”
>>> 「世尊！若諸有情自性而住，緣色等心所行影像，彼與此心亦無異耶？」
<<< “World-Honored One! All of the saṃskār-ic imagery of the mind conditioned by form, etc. [appearing to] abide with self nature, are they and this mind also without any difference?
>>> 「善男子！亦無有異！而諸愚夫由顛倒覺，於諸影像，不能如實知唯是識，作顛倒解。」
<<< “Kulaputra! They are also without any difference! However, due to their inverted awareness about all images, ignorant people are unable to know as it really is [that they] are consciousness only, having this inverted understanding.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！齊何當言菩薩一向修毘鉢舍那？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! What can be said to be the bodhisattva single-pointed practice of vipaśyanā?
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！若相續作意唯思惟心相。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! If the ‘continuity’ reflects only upon the characteristics of mind.”
>>> 「世尊！齊何當言菩薩一向修奢摩他？」
<<< “World-Honored One! What can be said to be the bodhisattva single-pointed practice of śamatha?
>>> 「善男子！若相續作意唯思惟無間心。」
<<< Kulaputra! If the ‘continuity’ reflects only with an uninterrupted mind (avīci-citta).
>>> 「世尊！齊何當言菩薩奢摩他、毘鉢舍那和合俱轉？」
<<< ‘World-Honored One! What can be said to be the bodhisattva union of śamatha and vipaśyanā?
>>> 「善男子！若正思惟心一境性。」
<<< “Kulaputra! If they correctly reflect upon the singular object of mind.”
>>> 「世尊！云何心相？」
<<< “World-Honored One! What are the ‘characteristics of mind’?
>>> 「善男子！謂三摩地所行有分別影像，毘鉢舍那所緣。」
<<< “Kulaputra! They are the differentiated images of the saṃskāra in śamatha, which are the conditions for vipaśyanā.
>>> 「世尊！云何無間心？」
<<< “World-Honored One! What is an ‘uninterrupted mind’?”
>>> 「善男子！謂緣彼影像心，奢摩他所緣。」
<<< “Kulaputra! It is that conditional, imaginary mind, which is the condition for śamatha.”
>>> 「世尊！云何心一境性？」
<<< “World-Honored One! What is the ‘singular object of mind’?”
>>> 「善男子！謂通達三摩地所行影像，唯是其識；或通達此已，復思惟如性。」
<<< “Kulaputra! It is penetrating the saṃskār-ic imagery of samādhi as being consciousness only; and after having penetrated this, then further reflecting upon its thus nature.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！毘鉢舍那凡有幾種？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! How many kinds of vipaśyanā are there?”
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！略有三種：一者、有相毘鉢舍那；二者、尋求毘鉢舍那；三者、伺察毘鉢舍那。云何有相毘鉢舍那？謂純思惟三摩地所行有分別影像毘鉢舍那。云何尋求毘鉢舍那？謂由慧故，遍於彼彼未善解了一切法中，為善了故，作意思惟毘鉢舍那。云何伺察毘鉢舍那？謂由慧故，遍於彼彼已善解了一切法中，為善證得極解脫故，作意思惟毘鉢舍那。」
<<< The Buddha replied the Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! There are three kinds: First, vipaśyanā upon characteristics; second, investigative vipaśyanā; and third, examining vipaśyanā. What is vipaśyanā upon characteristics? It is vipaśyanā purely reflecting upon the differentiated imagery of the saṃskāra [or, practice] of samādhi. What is investigative vipaśyanā? It is vipaśyanā which, through wisdom, attentively reflects upon all those things (dharma) not yet well understood in order to understand them well. What is examining vipaśyanā? It is vipaśyanā which, through wisdom, attentively reflects upon all those things (dharma) already well understood in order to well realize all that is understood and to attain ultimate liberation.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！是奢摩他凡有幾種？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! How many kinds of śamatha are there?
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！即由隨彼無間心故，當知此中亦有三種。復有八種，謂初靜慮乃至非想非非想處，各有一種奢摩他故。復有四種，謂慈、悲、喜、捨四無量中，各有一種奢摩他故。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! There is being in accord with that uninterrupted mind, you should know, with this there are also three kinds. Furthermore, there are eight kinds, which are first calming up to the base of neither perception nor non-perception, because each are a kind of śamatha. Furthermore, there are four kinds, which are friendliness, compassion, joy, and upekṣā within the Four Immeasurable, because each are a kind of śamatha.     
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如說依法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，復說不依法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那。云何名依法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那？云何復名不依法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! You have explained śamatha and vipaśyanā based upon the Dharma, and you have further explained śamatha and vipaśyanā that are not based upon the Dharma. What is it that is called ‘śamatha and vipaśyanā based upon the Dharma’? Furthermore, what is called, ‘śamatha and vipaśyanā that are not based upon the Dharma’?
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！若諸菩薩隨先所受所思法相，而於其義得奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，名依法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那。若諸菩薩不待所受所思法相，但依於他教誡教授，而於其義得奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，謂觀青瘀及膿爛等，或一切行皆是無常、或諸行苦、或一切法皆無有我、或復涅槃畢竟寂靜。如是等類奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，名不依法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那。由依止法得奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，故我施設隨法行菩薩，是利根性；由不依法得奢摩他、毘鉢舍那故，我施設隨信行菩薩，是鈍根性。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! The śamatha and vipaśyanā supported by the Dharma are that śamatha and vipaśyanā attained through the characteristics of dharmas and their meaning first received and pondered by the bodhisattvas. The śamatha and vipaśyanā not supported by the Dharma are the śamatha and vipaśyanā attained not through the characteristics of dharmas the bodhisattvas have received and pondered, but through the instructions and meanings of other teachings, such as observing decaying and rotting [bodies], or upon the impermanence of all saṃskāra, the suffering of all saṃskāra, the no-self of all things, or the final quiescence of cessation. Such quietude and vision I designate as not supported by Dharma. But, if they have attained a śamatha and vipaśyanā supported by the Dharma, those bodhisattvas I have designated as followers of the Dharma, and they have keen faculties, while, if they attain a śamatha and vipaśyanā not supported by Dharma, those bodhisattvas I have designated as followers of faith, and they have dull faculties.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如說緣別法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，復說緣總法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那。云何名為緣別法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那？云何復名緣總法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! You have explained śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally different dharma, and you have also explained śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally unified dharma. What is it that is called ‘śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally different dharma’? Furthermore, what is called śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally unified dharma?”         
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！若諸菩薩，緣於各別契經等法，於如所受所思惟法，修奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，是名緣別法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那。若諸菩薩，即緣一切契經等法，集為一團、一積、一分、一聚作意思惟：此一切法，隨順真如，趣向真如，臨入真如；隨順菩提，隨順涅槃，隨順轉依，及趣向彼，若臨入彼。此一切法，宣說無量無數善法。如是思惟修奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，是名緣總法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva, “Kulaputra! If bodhisattvas cultivate śamatha and vipaśyanā upon each of the various dharma in the sutras, etc., Dharma which they have received and reflected upon, this is called śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally different dharma. If bodhisattvas take as the object of their reflection the dharma in all sutras, etc., gathering them into one whole, one mass, one part, one assemblage. This ‘everything dharma’ is in accord with True Thusness, moving toward True Thusness, on the brink of entering True Thusness; It is in accord with bodhi, in accord with Nirvana, in accord with the ‘conversion of the base’, and moving toward that, if on the brink of entering that; This ‘everything dharma’ is proclaimed to be immeasurable, innumerable virtuous dharma. Śamatha and vipaśyanā reflecting like this, this is called śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally unified dharmas.
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如說緣小總法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，復說緣大總法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，又說緣無量總法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那。云何名緣小總法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那？云何名緣大總法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那？云何復名緣無量總法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! You have explained śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally minor unified dharma, and further explained śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally great unified dharma, and you have also explained śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally immeasurable unified dharma. What is called śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally minor unified dharma? What is called śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally great unified dharma? What is called śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally immeasurable unified dharma?
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！若緣各別契經，乃至各別論義，為一團等作意思惟，當知是名緣小總法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那。若緣乃至所受所思契經等法，為一團等作意思惟，非緣各別，當知是名緣大總法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那。若緣無量如來法教，無量法句文字，無量後後慧所照了，為一團等作意思惟，非緣乃至所受所思，當知是名緣無量總法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! If one takes as the object of understanding the meaning of each of the different sutras and even each of the different commentaries, and attentively reflects upon them as one whole, etc., you should this is called śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally minor unified dharma. If one takes as the object of understanding the dharma in the sutras, which they have received and reflected upon, and attentively reflects upon them as one whole, etc., without considering them separately, you should know this is called śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally great unified dharma. If one takes as the objects of understanding the immeasurable teachings of the Dharma of the Thus Come One, the immeasurable words and expressions of that Dharma, and the immeasurable clarifications of ever more excellent wisdom, and attentively reflects upon them as one whole, etc., without considering them separately, you should know, this is called śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally immeasurable unified dharma.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！菩薩齊何名得緣總法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! When can a bodhisattva be said to have attained śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally unified dharma?”
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！由五緣故當知名得：一者、於思惟時，剎那剎那融銷一切麁重所依；二者、離種種想得樂法樂；三者、解了十方無差別相無量法光；四者、所作成滿相應淨分無分別相，恒現在前；五者、為令法身得成滿故，攝受後後轉勝妙因。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! You should know, it is due to five conditions that it is said: First, When reflecting, kṣaṇa-to-kṣaṇa (’moment to moment’), the foundation of ‘gross heaviness’ is melted away; Second, they transcend all the varieties of perception (saṁjñā) and take joy in [the] Dharma; Third, they understand the immeasurable light of the Dharma which has no differentiating characteristics throughout the Ten Directions; Fourth, the pure, undifferentiated characteristic of the characteristics of the fulfillment of what is to be done are constantly present before them; Fifth, To now attain fulfillment of the Dharma Body they embrace (saṃgraha) that supreme, wondrous ever-turning cause.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！此緣總法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，當知從何名為通達？從何名得？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “Word-Honored One! This śamatha and vipaśyanā upon conditionally unified dharma, how should we know from what [point] is is called penetration (prativedha)? From what [point] is it called attainment?”
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！從初極喜地名為通達；從第三發光地乃名為得。善男子！初業菩薩亦於是中隨學作意，雖未可歎，不應懈廢。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! From the initial stage of Extreme Joy it is called penetration; From the third stage of Light-Maker it is called attainment. Kulaputra! Bodhisattvas just starting out also study and reflect upon all this. Although they are not yet worthy of praise, still they should not slacken or give up."
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！是奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，云何名有尋有伺三摩地？云何名無尋唯伺三摩地？云何名無尋無伺三摩地？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! This śamatha and vipaśyanā, what is called samādhi with [active] investigation (vitarka) and [passive] consideration (vicāra)? What is called samādhi without investigation and only consideration? And what is called samādhi without investigation or consideration?”
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！於如所取尋伺法相，若有麁顯領受觀察，諸奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，是名有尋有伺三摩地。若於彼相，雖無麁顯領受觀察，而有微細彼光明念領受觀察，諸奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，是名無尋唯伺三摩地。若即於彼一切法相，都無作意領受觀察，諸奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，是名無尋無伺三摩地。
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! If there are ‘gross’ insights received in regard to the characteristics of dharmas one has received for investigation and consideration in  śamatha and vipaśyanā, this is called samādhi with investigation and consideration. If there are no gross insights received in regard to those characteristics, yet there is a subtlety and the mind, in that light, receives an insight in śamatha and vipaśyanā, this is called samādhi without investigation and only consideration. If there is the reception of insight without any effort in regard to the characteristic(s) of all dharmas in śamatha and vipaśyanā this is called Samādhi without investigation or consideration.
>>> 「復次，善男子！若有尋求奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，是名有尋有伺三摩地。若有伺察奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，是名無尋唯伺三摩地。若緣總法奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，是名無尋無伺三摩地。」
<<< “Furthermore, Kulaputra! If śamatha and vipaśyanā are with a searching investigation it is called samādhi with investigation and consideration. If śamatha and vipaśyanā are with an analytical consideration it is called samādhi without investigation and only consideration. If śamatha and vipaśyanā are upon the conditionally unified dharma it is called Samādhi without investigation or consideration.”    
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！云何止相？云何舉相？云何捨相？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! What is the characteristic of ‘stopping’? What is the characteristic of arousal (’going’, rising up)? What is the characteristic of relinquishment?
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！若心掉舉或恐掉舉時，諸可厭法作意及彼無間心作意，是名止相。若心沈沒或恐沈沒時，諸可欣法作意及彼心相作意，是名舉相。若於一向止道，或於一向觀道，或於雙運轉道，二隨煩惱所染污時，諸無功用作意，及心任運轉中所有作意，是名捨相。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! When the mind is unsettled or afraid of becoming unsettled, bringing undesirable things to mind and then bringing about that uninterrupted mind, this is called the characteristic of stopping. When the mind is sunken or afraid of becoming sunken, bringing joyful things to mind and then bringing about that characteristic of mind, this is called the characteristic of arousal. When headed on the path of stopping, or headed on the path of ‘seeing’, or the path of evolving both together, if the defilement of these two afflictions should follow along, bringing about effortlessness to mind and then bringing about a mind from within the spontaneous operation of mind, this is called the characteristic of relinquishment.


>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！修奢摩他、毘鉢舍那諸菩薩眾，知法知義。云何知法？云何知義？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! All those bodhisattvas who practice śamatha and vipaśyanā know both Dharma and [its] meaning (artha). What is knowing Dharma? What is knowing meaning?”

Knowing All Dharma
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！彼諸菩薩，由五種相了知於法：一者、知名；二者、知句；三者、知文；四者、知別；五者知總。云何為名？謂於一切染淨法中，所立自性想假施設。云何為句？謂即於彼名聚集中，能隨宣說諸染淨義，依持建立。云何為文？謂即彼二所依止字。云何於彼各別了知？謂由各別所緣作意。云何於彼總合了知？謂由總合所緣作意。如是一切總略為一，名為知法。如是名為菩薩知法。
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! All those bodhisattvas understand Dharma by five kinds of characteristics: 1. knowing names (words); 2. knowing phrases (sentences); 3. knowing writing; 4. knowing differences; 5. knowing unity. What are names? They are the provisional perceptual designations that establish inherent nature among all defiled and purified dharmas. What are phrases? They are then the gathering together of those names and the ability to use them in discourse to explain the foundational basis of the meaning of ‘defiled’ and ‘pure’. What is writing? It is then the putting into characters (letters, symbols) those two (names and phrases). What is it to understand the differences of each of these? It is brining to mind each different one as a condition. What is it to understand that as a unity? It is from bringing to mind the condition of its unification. Everything unified into one like this is called knowing Dharma. Like this, it is called a bodhisattva knowing Dharma.”

Knowing All Meaning
>>> 「善男子！彼諸菩薩，由十種相了知於義：一者、知盡所有性；二者、知如所有性；三者、知能取義；四者、知所取義；五者、知建立義；六者、知受用義；七者、知顛倒義；八者、知無倒義；九者、知雜染義；十者、知清淨義。
<<< “Kulaputra! All those bodhisattvas understand Meaning (ārtha) by ten kind of characteristics: 1. they know the limit of existent nature. 2. they know the suchness of existent nature. 3. they know the meaning of subject. 4. they know the meaning of object. 5. they know the meaning of construct (pratiṣṭhā). 6. they know the meaning of enjoyment (saṃbhoga). 7. they know the meaning of inversion (viparyaya). 8. they know the meaning of not being inverted. 9. they know the meaning of defilement (kaṣāya). 10. they know the meaning of purification (viśuddhi).”
>>> 「善男子！盡所有性者，謂諸雜染清淨法中，所有一切品別邊際，是名此中盡所有性。如五數蘊、六數內處、六數外處，如是一切。
<<< “Kulaputra! 1. The limit of existent nature is the limit to the differentiating analysis of all that exists among all defiled and purified dharmas. Within what is called the limit of existent nature, there are such things as the five aggregates, the six internal bases, the six external bases, everything like this.”
>>> 「如所有性者，謂即一切染淨法中，所有真如，是名此中如所有性。此復七種：一者、流轉真如，謂一切行無先後性；二者、相真如，謂一切法、補特伽羅無我性及法無我性；三者、了別真如，謂一切行唯是識性；四者、安立真如，謂我所說諸苦聖諦；五者、邪行真如，謂我所說諸集聖諦；六者、清淨真如，謂我所說諸滅聖諦；七者、正行真如，謂我所說諸道聖諦。當知此中由流轉真如、安立真如、邪行真如故，一切有情平等平等。由相真如、了別真如故，一切諸法平等平等。由清淨真如故，一切聲聞菩提、獨覺菩提、阿耨多羅三藐三菩提，平等平等。由正行真如故，聽聞正法，緣總境界勝奢摩他、毘鉢舍那所攝受慧，平等平等。
<<< The Seven Suchnesses

“The suchness of existent nature is there then being bhūtatathatā (True Suchness) among all defiled and purified dharmas. Within what is called the suchness of existent nature there are these seven kinds: 1. The True Suchness of transmigration (saṃsāra), which is that all conditionings (saṃskāra) are without the nature of before or after; 2. The True Suchness of characteristics (lakṣana), which is the self-less nature of the pudgala and the self-less nature of all dharmas; 3. The True Suchness of discernment, which is all conditionings being of the nature of ‘consciousness-only’; 4. The True Suchness of the firmly established (supratiṣṭhita), which is the Noble Truth of suffering I have explained; 5. The True Suchness of erroneous action, which is the Noble Truth of the accumulation of suffering I have explained; 6. The True Suchness of purification, which is the Noble Truth of the cessation I have explained; 7. The True Suchness of correct action, which is the Noble Truth of the Path I have explained. You should know, within this, due to the True Suchness of transmigration, the True Suchness of the firmly established, and the True Suchness of erroneous action, all sentient beings and entirely equal. Due to the True Suchness of characteristics and the True Suchness of discernment, all dharmas are entirely equal. And due to the Ture Suchness of purification, the awakening (bodhi) of voice hearers, the awakening of the solitary enlightened, the anuttarā-saṃyak-saṃbodhi are entirely equal. Due to the True Suchness of correct action, the Correct Dharma that has been heard and the wisdom received and embraced in the unified realm of śamatha and vipaśyanā are entirely equal.”
>>> 「能取義者，謂內五色處、若心、意、識及諸心法。
<<< “3. The meaning of subject is the five internal sense bases and, there being mind, thought, and consciousness then there are all the dharmas of mind.”
>>> 「所取義者，謂外六處。又能取義，亦所取義。
<<< “4. The meaning of object is the six external sense bases, as well as the meaning of subject and the meaning of object.”
>>> 「建立義者，謂器世界，於中可得建立一切諸有情界。謂一村田、若百村田、若千村田、若百千村田。或一大地至海邊際，此百、此千、若此百千。或一贍部洲，此百、此千、若此百千。或一四大洲，此百、此千、若此百千。或一小千世界，此百、此千、若此百千。或一中千世界，此百、此千、若此百千。或一三千大千世界，此百、此千、若此百千。或此拘胝、此百拘胝、此千拘胝、此百千拘胝。或此無數、此百無數、此千無數、此百千無數、或三千大千世界無數、百千微塵量等，於十方面無量無數諸器世界。
<<< “5. The meaning of construct (or structure, pratiṣṭhā) is the world as a device, upon which are constructed the realms of sentient beings, whether it be a single village, or a hundred villages, or a thousand villages, or a hundred thousand villages; whether a single great land bordering the ocean, or a hundred, or a thousand, or a hundred thousand; Or a single Jumbud continent, or a hundred, or a thousand, or a hundred thousand; whether a single Four Great Continents, or a hundred, or a thousand, or a hundred thousand; whether a single small world-system, or a hundred, or a thousand, or a hundred thousand; whether a single medium world-system, or a hundred, or a thousand, or a hundred thousand; whether a single Three Thousand Great Thousand world-system, or a hundred, or a thousand, or a hundred thousand; or whether a koṭī, a hundred koṭī, a hunred thousand koṭī; or an immeasurable amount, or a hundred immeasurables, or a thousand immeasurables, or a hundred thousand immeasurables; or whether an amount equal to all the immeasurable hundreds of thousands of minute particles in Three Thousand Great Thousand world-systems throughout the Ten Directions, encompassing immeasurable, incalculable worlds as devices.”
>>> 「受用義者，謂我所說諸有情類，為受用故，攝受資具。
<<< “6. The meaning of enjoyment (saṃbhoga) is the embracing all the necessities for all kinds of sentient beings to receive enjoyment as I have explained.
>>> 「顛倒義者，謂即於彼能取等義，無常計常，想倒、心倒、見倒。苦計為樂，不淨計淨，無我計我，想倒、心倒、見倒。
<<< “7. The meaning of inversion (viparyaya) is also the meaning of that subject, [object] taking the impermanent to be permanent, perceiving inverted, mind inverted mind, seeing (or view) inverted; taking suffering to be pleasure; the impure to be pure; and that which is without self for self, perceiving inverted, mind inverted, seeing (or view) inverted.”
>>> 「無倒義者，與上相違。能對治彼，應知其相。
<<< “8. The meaning of not being inverted is not being with the characteristics of the above. To be able to stand against them, one must know their characteristics.”
>>> 「雜染義者，謂三界中三種雜染：一者、煩惱雜染；二者、業雜染；三者、生雜染。
<<< “9. The meaning of defilement (kaṣāya) is the three kinds of defilement within the Triple Realm: 1. Defilement of afflictions; 2. Defilement of karma; 3. Defilement of birth.”
>>> 「清淨義者，謂即如是三種雜染，所有離繫菩提分法。
<<< “10. The meaning of purification (viśuddhi) is the dharma of the factors of awakening, which are able to transcend those three kinds of defilement.”
>>> 「善男子！如是十種，當知普攝一切諸義。
<<< “Kulaputra! These ten kinds, you should know, encompass all meaning.”
>>> 「復次，善男子！彼諸菩薩，由能了知五種義故，名為知義。何等五義？一者、遍知事；二者、遍知義；三者、遍知因；四者、得遍知果；五者、於此覺了。
<<< “Furthermore, kulaputra! All those bodhisattvas, because they are able to understand five kinds [types, or even ‘seeds’) of meaning, are said to know meaning. What are the five meanings? 1. All- pervasive knowledge of matters; 2. All-pervasive knowledge of meanings; 3. All-pervasive knowledge of causes; 4. All-pervasive knowledge of results; 5. fully awakened knowledge of all this.”
>>> 「善男子！此中遍知事者，當知即是一切所知：謂或諸蘊，或諸內處或諸外處；如是一切。
<<< “Kulaputra! 1. The all-pervasive knowledge of matters herein, you should know, refers to knowledge of all that is knowable: such as all of the aggregates, all of the internal sense bases, the external sense bases, like this, everything.”
>>> 「遍知義者，乃至所有品類差別所應知境。謂世俗故、或勝義故，或功德故、或過失故，緣故，世故，或生、或住、或壞相故，或如病等故，或苦集等故，或真如、實際、法界等故，或廣略故，或一向記故、或分別記故、或反問記故、或置記故，或隱密故、或顯了故：如是等類，當知一切名遍知義。
<<< “2. All-pervasive knowledge of meaning is the state of knowledge of all the different varieties and differentiations there are to be known: whether worldly conventions or the ultimate meaning, or of virtues, or of faults, or of the conditioned, or of time, or of arising, or of abiding, or of the characteristic of passing away, or of things like illness, or of the accumulation of suffering, etc., or of the True Suchness Reality of the equality of the Dharmadhatu, or of the general or the specific, or of a direct answer, or of a differentiating answer, or of a questioning in return answer, or of an avoiding answer, or of the occulted (hidden, secret, mysterious), or of the revealed; all such varieties as these, you should know, are what is called all-pervasive knowledge of meaning.”
>>> 「言遍知因者，當知即是能取前二菩提分法，所謂念住或正斷等。
<<< “3. To speak of all-pervasive knowledge of causes, you should know, refers to the mindful abiding and correct severance, etc.. which are what enable the comprehension of the previous two factors of awakening (bodhi).”
>>> 「得遍知果者，謂貪、恚、癡永斷毘奈耶，及貪、恚、癡一切永斷諸沙門果。及我所說聲聞、如來若共不共世出世間所有功德，於彼作證。
<<< “4. All-pervasive knowledge of results refers to the realization of the Vinaya (’discipline’) that forever severs greed, hatred, and delusion, and the results of all śramaṇa’s eternal severance of all greed, hatred, and delusion, and, all common and extraordinary, worldly and transcendent virtuous of the Thus Come One that I have explained to the voice hearers”
>>> 「於此覺了者，謂即於此作證法中，諸解脫智，廣為他說、宣揚、開示。
<<< “5. Fully awakened knowledge of all this refers to extensively explaining all the liberated knowledge of the realization of this Dharma to others, spreading it about and demonstrating.”
>>> 「善男子！如是五義，當知普攝一切諸義。
<<< “Kulaputra! These five meanings, you should know, encompass all meanings.”
>>> 「復次，善男子！彼諸菩薩，由能了知四種義故，名為知義。何等四義？一者、心執受義；二者、領納義；三者、了別義；四者、雜染清淨義。善男子！如是四義，當知普攝一切諸義。
<<< “Furthermore, Kulaputra! Those bodhisattvas are said to know meaning because they are able to understand four kinds of meaning: What four meanings? First, the meaning of mental grasping; second, the meaning of experience; third, the meaning of differentiation (vikalpa); and fourth, the meaning of defilement and purity. Kulaputra! You should know, these four meanings encompass all meaning.
>>> 「復次，善男子！彼諸菩薩，由能了知三種義故，名為知義。何等三義？一者、文義；二者、義義；三者、界義。
<<< “Furthermore, kulaputra! Those bodhisattvas are said to know meaning because they are able to understand three kinds of meaning. What three meanings? First, the meaning of expressions; second, the meaning of meaning; third, the meaning of realms (dhātu).”
>>> 「善男子！言文義者，謂名身等。
<<< “Kulaputra! The meaning of spoken expressions is what is called the body, etc.
>>> 「義義當知復有十種：一者、真實相；二者、遍知相；三者、永斷相；四者、作證相；五者、修習相；六者、即彼真實相等品差別相；七者、所依能依相屬相；八者、即遍知等障礙法相；九者、即彼隨順法相；十者、不遍知等及遍知等過患功德相。
<<< “The meaning of meaning, you should know, also had ten types: 1. The Characteristic of True Suchness (bhūtatathatā-lakṣana); 2. the characteristic of all-pervasive knowledge; 3. the characteristic of eternal severance; 4. the characteristic of realization; 5. the characteristic of cultivation, 6. the characteristic of those things (#2-5) differentiated from the Characteristic of True Suchness; 7. the characteristic of the interdependence between whatever are characterized as support and the supported; 8. the characteristic of being an obstruction to the Dharma of all-pervasive knowledge, etc.; 9. the characteristic of that which is in accord with those Dharma; and 10. the characteristic of the faults of there not being all-pervasive knowledge, etc., and virtues of there being all-pervasive knowledge, etc.”
>>> 「言界義者，謂五種界：一者、器世界；二者、有情界；三者、法界；四者、所調伏界；五者、調伏方便界。
<<< “The meaning of what are called realms is of five kinds of realms: 1. the realm of the material world; 2. the realm of sentient beings; 3. the Dharma Realm; 4. the realm of discipline; 5. the realm of disciplinary upaya.”
>>> 「善男子！如是五義，當知普攝一切諸義。」
<<< ‘Kulaputra! These five meanings, you should know, encompass all meaning.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！若聞所成慧了知其義，若思所成慧了知其義，若奢摩他、毘鉢舍那修所成慧了知其義，此何差別？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva further addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! What is the difference between the intelligence gained by understanding meaning through hearing, the intelligence gained by understanding meaning through contemplation, and the intelligence gained by understanding meaning through śamatha and vipaśyanā?”
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！聞所成慧，依止於文，但如其說，未善意趣，未現在前，隨順解脫，未能領受成解脫義。思所成慧，亦依於文，不唯如說，能善意趣，未現在前，轉順解脫，未能領受成解脫義。若諸菩薩修所成慧，亦依於文亦不依文，亦如其說亦不如說，能善意趣，所知事同分三摩地所行影像現前，極順解脫，已能領受成解脫義。善男子！是名三種知義差別。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya saying, “Kulaputra! Intelligence gained from hearing relies and rests upon expressions, it is only as has been explained; never arriving at a Good Mind, never having it appear forefront; headed for liberation, yet not yet able to achieve the meaning of Liberation.”

“Intelligence gained from contemplation also relies upon expressions, but is not only as has been explained; able to arrive at a Good Mind, yet not yet appearing forefront; (r)evolving toward liberation, yet not yet able to achieve the meaning of Liberation.”

“Intelligence gained from the cultivation of bodhisattvas also relies upon expressions, yet also does not rely upon expressions; is as has been explained, and also not as has been explained; able to arrive at a Good Mind, whatever there is to be known or created appears forefront as images in the practice of samādhi, ultimately conforming to liberation and able to take in the meaning of and gain Liberation. Kulaputra! These are called the three different types of knowledge of means.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！修奢摩他、毘鉢舍那諸菩薩眾，知法知義，云何為智？云何為見？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addresses the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! What is Wisdom and what is seeing (vision, insight, view) of all those bodhisattvas who know Dharma and its meaning through their cultivation of śamatha and vipaśyanā?”
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！我無量門宣說智、見二種差別，今當為汝略說其相。若緣總法修奢摩他、毘鉢舍那所有妙慧，是名為智；若緣別法修奢摩他、毘鉢舍那所有妙慧，是名為見。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! I have explained the differentiations of Wisdom and seeing in innumerable ways, I will now tell you about their characteristics in general. If one cultivates śamatha and vipaśyanā focused on the Dharma as a unified whole, the subtle intellect therein is called Wisdom. If one cultivates śamatha and vipaśyanā focused on differentiated Dharma, the subtle intellect therein is called seeing.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！修奢摩他、毘鉢舍那諸菩薩眾由何，作意何等？云何除遣諸相？」
<<< Maitreya again addressed the Buddha saying, ‘World-Honored One! What is the mind of a bodhisattva like in śamatha and vipaśyanā and how is it done? How are all characteristics removed?”
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！由真如作意，除遣法相及與義相；若於其名及名自性無所得時，亦不觀彼所依之相，如是除遣。如於其名，於句、於文、於一切義，當知亦爾。乃至於界及界自性無所得時，亦不觀彼所依之相，如是除遣。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya saying, “Kulaputra! By the mind of True Suchness, the characteristics of dharmas as well as the characteristic of meaning (’significance’) are removed. When there in nothing to be attained in names and in the self-nature of names, there is also no observing the characteristics upon which they are based, thus they are removed. As with names, also with sentences and expressions, toward all meaning, you should know, is also like this. When there is nothing to be attained in any realm or self-nature of realms, there is also no observing the characteristics upon which they are based, thus they are removed.”
>>> 「世尊！諸所了知真如義相，此真如相亦可遣不？」
<<< “World-honored One! What about the Characteristic of True Suchness understood; is the Characteristic of True Suchness also to be removed, or not?”
>>> 「善男子！於所了知真如義中，都無有相，亦無所得，當何所遣？善男子！我說了知真如義時，能伏一切法義之相，非此了達餘所能伏。」
<<< “Kulaputra! Within the understanding of the meaning of True Suchness, there are no characteristics and there is also nothing to attain, how could there be anything to remove? Kulaputra! When I explain[ed] the meaning of understanding True Suchness, it is able to control the characteristics of the meaning of all things, yet it is not that this discernment is something further to be controlled.”
>>> 「世尊！如世尊說，濁水器喻、不淨鏡喻、撓泉池喻，不任觀察自面影相；若堪任者，與上相違。如是若有不善修心，則不堪任如實觀察所有真如；若善修心，堪任觀察。此說何等能觀察心？依何真如而作是說？」
<<< “World-Honored One! As the World-Honored One has explained using the analogy of the bowl of turbid water, the analogy of the unclean mirror, and the analogy of the bubbling spring, that they cannot sustain investigation (pravicaya) of the characteristic features of one’s own face. The opposite of these then sustain the characteristics. Like this, if the mind is not well cultivated, then it will not be able to sustain real investigation of True Suchness. If the mind is well cultivated, it sustains investigation. In this explanation, what is able to investigate mind? Upon what True Suchness is this explanation based?"
>>> 「善男子！此說三種能觀察心，謂聞所成能觀察心，若思所成能觀察心，若修所成能觀察心。依了別真如作如是說。」
<<< “Kulaputra! These explanations speak of three kinds of ability to investigate mind (pravicaya): gaining the ability to investigate mind by learning (’hearing’), gaining the ability to investigate mind by pondering, and gaining the ability to investigate mind by cultivation. Explanations like this are based upon True Suchness differentiated like this.”
>>> 「世尊！如是了知法義菩薩為遣諸相勤修加行，有幾種相難可除遣？誰能除遣？」
<<< “World-Honored One! Completely understanding the meaning of Dharma and Meaning like this, bodhisattvas earnestly cultivate practices of getting rid of all characteristics. How many kind of characteristics are hard to get rid of? Who can get rid of them?”
>>> 「善男子！有十種相，空能除遣。何等為十？一者、了知法義故，有種種文字相；此由一切法空，能正除遣。二者、了知安立真如義故，有生、滅、住、異性相續隨轉相；此由相空及無先後空，能正除遣。三者、了知能取義故，有顧戀身相及我慢相；此由內空及無所得空，能正除遣。四者、了知所取義故，有顧戀財相；此由外空，能正除遣。五者、了知受用義、男女承事資具相應故，有內安樂相、外淨妙相；此由內外空及本性空，能正除遣。六者、了知建立義故，有無量相；此由大空，能正除遣。七者、了知無色故，有內寂靜解脫相；此由有為空，能正除遣。八者、了知相真如義故，有補特伽羅無我相、法無我相，若唯識相及勝義相；此由畢竟空、無性空、無性自性空及勝義空，能正除遣。九者、由了知清淨真如義故，有無為相、無變異相；此由無為空、無變異空，能正除遣。十者、即於彼相對治空性，作意思惟故，有空性相；此由空空，能正除遣。」
<<< “Kulaputra! There are ten kinds of characteristics, which emptiness is able to get rid of. What ten? 1. Since they completely understand all ‘Dharma’ and ‘Meaning’, there are the characteristics of all kinds of expressions and words, which are correctly gotten rid of because all dharmas are empty; 2. Since they completely understand the meaning of the establishment of True Suchness, there are the characteristics of arising, ceasing, abiding, and different natures, and the characteristics of continuous succession, which are correctly gotten rid of because all characteristics are empty, and are also without before or after; 3. Since they completely understand the meaning of subject (lit. ‘that which is able to grasp’), there are the characteristics of loving the body and the characteristic of self conceit, which are correctly gotten rid of because internality is empty, and the emptiness of there not being anything to attain; 4. Since they completely understand the meaning of object (lit. ‘that which is grasped’), there are the characteristics of loving possessions, which are correctly gotten rid of because of the emptiness of externality; 5. Completely understanding the meaning of enjoyment, since men and women flirt with the characteristics of their endowments, there are the characteristics of internal pleasure and the characteristics of external charm, which are correctly gotten rid of because of the emptiness of internality and externality, and the emptiness of original nature; 6. Completely understanding the meaning of constructs (asserations), there are immeasurable characteristics, which are correctly gotten rid of because of the emptiness of greatness; 7. Completely understanding the meaning of formlessness, there are the characteristics of inner tranquility and liberation, which are correctly gotten rid of because of the emptiness of the conditioned; 8. Since they completely understand the meaning of the True Suchness of characteristics, there are the characteristics of selfless pudgalas and the characteristic of the selflessness of dharmas, whether characteristics solely of the consciousness or the Characteristic of Ultimate Meaning, which are correctly gotten rid of because of the emptiness of finality, the emptiness of naturelessness, the emptiness of the self-nature of naturelessness, and the emptiness of Ultimate Meaning; 9. Since they completely understand the meaning of the purity of True Suchness, there is the characteristic of the unconditioned and the characteristic of changlessness, which are correctly gotten rid of because of the emptiness of the unconditioned and the emptiness of changlessness; and 10. Since they have these thoughts from the empty nature of those ridded characteristics, there is the characteristic of the nature of emptiness, which is correctly gotten rid of because of the emptiness of emptiness.
>>> 「世尊！除遣如是十種相時，除遣何等？從何等相而得解脫？」
<<< “World-Honored One! When these ten types of characteristics are gotten rid of, what more is there to get rid of? From what other characteristics is liberation attained?”
>>> 「善男子！除遣三摩地所行影像相；從雜染縛相而得解脫，彼亦除遣。善男子！當知就勝說，如是空治如是相，非不一一治一切相。譬如無明，非不能生乃至老死諸雜染法。就勝但說能生於行，由是諸行親近緣故。此中道理，當知亦爾。」
<<< “Kulaputra! Getting rid of all the characteristics of the images that arise from the practice of samādhi; from the bonds of defiled characteristics is liberation attained. Kulaputra! You should know, ultimately speaking, emptiness like this governs all characteristics, and it is not that each one governs each of those characteristics ’one-for-one’. Just like ignorance, it is not that it is not able to give rise to all the other defiled dharmas up to old-age and death. Ultimately, however, it is explained as that which is able to give rise to conditioning (saṃskāra), since it is the immediate causal condition of all conditioning. And the Truth within this, you should know, is also so.”
>>> 爾時，慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！此中何等空是總空性相？若諸菩薩了知是已，無有失壞於空性相，離增上慢？」
<<< At that time, Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! What kind of emptiness is within that unified characteristic of the nature of emptiness if bodhisattvas have fully understood this, without an erroneous decaying sense of the characteristic of the nature of emptiness, and are free of prideful conceit?”
>>> 爾時，世尊歎慈氏菩薩曰：「善哉，善哉！善男子！汝今乃能請問如來如是深義，令諸菩薩於空性相無有失壞。何以故？善男子！若諸菩薩於空性相有失壞者，便為失壞一切大乘。是故汝應諦聽，諦聽！當為汝說總空性相。善男子！若於依他起相及圓成實相中，一切品類雜染、清淨遍計所執相，畢竟遠離性，及於此中都無所得，如是名為於大乘中總空性相。」
<<< At that time, the World-Honored One praised Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Excellent! Excellent! Kulaputra! You have now been able to ask the Thus Come One about such profound meaning, causing bodhisattvas not to have an erroneous decaying sense of the characteristic of the nature of emptiness. Why? Kulaputra! If bodhisattvas have have an erroneous decaying sense of the characteristic of the nature of emptiness then they will be erroneous about and decay the entire Great Vehicle. For this reason, you should listen attentively, listen attentively! I will explain the unified characteristic of the nature of emptiness. Kulaputra! Among the characteristic of arising in dependence upon another and the characteristic of complete, perfect reality, if all the varieties of defiled and pure imaginary characteristics are completely free of natures and, within this, there is nothing to be attained, like this, this is called the unified characteristic of the nature of emptiness within the Great Vehicle.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！此奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，能攝幾種勝三摩地？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! How many kinds of superior samādhis is this śamatha and vipaśyanā able to harmonize (embrace, includes)?”
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！如我所說無量聲聞、菩薩、如來，有無量種勝三摩地，當知一切皆此所攝。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! As I have explained, the immeasurable Voice Hearers, Bodhisattvas, and Thus Come Ones have immeasurable kinds of superior samādhis, you should know, each one harmonizes all of these.”
>>> 「世尊！此奢摩他、毘鉢舍那以何為因？」
<<< “World-Honored One! What is the cause of this śamatha and vipaśyanā?”
>>> 「善男子！清淨尸羅，清淨聞思所成正見，以為其因。」
<<< “Kulaputra! Pure śīla and Right View developed from pure ‘hearing and pondering’ (śruta-cintā) are the cause.”
>>> 「世尊！此奢摩他、毘鉢舍那以何為果？」
<<< “World-Honored One! “What is the result (’fruit’) of this śamatha and vipaśyanā?”
>>> 「善男子！善清淨戒、清淨心、善清淨慧，以為其果。復次，善男子！一切聲聞及如來等，所有世間及出世間一切善法，當知皆是此奢摩他、毘鉢舍那所得之果。」
<<< “Kulaputra! Excellent pure discipline and pure mind, and excellent pure wisdom are the results. Furthermore, Kulaputra! All the excellent Dharma of every Voice Hearer and Thus Come One, etc,, worldly and transcendent, you should know, they are all the ‘fruit attained’ (result) of this śamatha and vipaśyanā.”
>>> 「世尊！此奢摩他、毘鉢舍那能作何業？」
<<< “World-Honored One! What karma is this śamatha and vipaśyanā able to create?”
>>> 「善男子！此能解脫二縛為業，所謂相縛及麁重縛。」
<<< “Kulaputra! It is able to liberate from two bonds of karma, the bonds of characteristics and the bonds of ‘gross, coarse heaviness’  [sthūla and lakṣaṇa bandha, see Ch. 2].”
>>> 「世尊！如佛所說五種繫中，幾是奢摩他障？幾是毘鉢舍那障？幾是俱障？」
<<< “World-Honored One! As the Buddha has explained, among the five kinds of entanglements (vibandha), how many are obstructions to śamatha, how many are obstructions to vipaśyanā, and how many are obstructions to both?”
>>> 「善男子！顧戀身財，是奢摩他障；於諸聖教不得隨欲，是毘鉢舍那障；樂相雜住，於少喜足，當知俱障。由第一故，不能造修；由第二故，所修加行不到究竟。」
<<< “Kulaputra! Lust for bodies and possessions is an obstruction to śamatha. Lack of interest in the Noble Teachings is an obstruction to vipaśyanā. Abiding in the turbulence of pleasurable images and being content with shallowness are, you should know, obstructions to both together. Due to the first of these, one is unable to cultivate; due to the second, any practice cultivated will not reach completion.”
>>> 「世尊！於五蓋中，幾是奢摩他障？幾是毘鉢舍那障？幾是俱障？」
<<< “World-Honored One! Of the five ‘coverings’ (nīvaraṇa), how many are obstructions to śamatha , how many are obstructions to vipaśyanā, and how many are obstructions to both?”
>>> 「善男子！掉舉、惡作，是奢摩他障；惛沈、睡眠、疑，是毘鉢舍那障；貪欲、瞋恚，當知俱障。」
<<< “Kulaputra! Restlessness and worry (auddhatya-kaukritya) is an obstruction to śamatha. Stupification and laziness (thīna-middha), and doubt (vicikitsā) are obstacles to vipaśyanā. Desirousness (kāmacchanda) and anger and resentment (vyāpāda), you should know, are obstacles to both.”
>>> 「世尊！齊何名得奢摩他道圓滿清淨？」
<<< “World-Honored One! What can be called attainment of the fulfillment of purity of the path of śamatha?”
>>> 「善男子！乃至所有惛沈、睡眠正善除遣，齊是名得奢摩他道圓滿清淨。」
<<< “Kulaputra! When whatever stupefication and laziness there is has been correctly gotten rid of, then this is called attaining the fulfillment of purity of the path of śamatha.
>>> 「世尊！齊何名得毘鉢舍那道圓滿清淨？」
<<< “World-Honored One! What can be called attainment of the fulfillment of purity of the path of vipaśyanā?”
>>> 「善男子！乃至所有掉舉、惡作正善除遣，齊是名得毘鉢舍那道圓滿清淨。」
<<< “Kulaputra! When whatever ambition and regret there is has been correctly gotten rid of, then this is called attaining the fulfillment of purity of the path of vipaśyanā.”
>>> 「世尊！若諸菩薩於奢摩他、毘鉢舍那現在前時，應知幾種心散動法？」
<<< “World-Honored One! When bodhisattvas appear in this śamatha and vipaśyanā, how many different kinds of mental distractions (vikṣepa) should they know about?”
>>> 「善男子！應知五種：一者、作意散動；二者、外心散動；三者、內心散動；四者、相散動；五者、麁重散動。善男子！若諸菩薩捨於大乘相應作意，墮在聲聞、獨覺相應諸作意中，當知是名作意散動。若於其外五種妙欲諸雜亂相，所有尋思隨煩惱中，及於其外所緣境中，縱心流散，當知是名外心散動。若由惛沈及以睡眠，或由沈沒，或由愛味三摩鉢底，或由隨一三摩鉢底諸隨煩惱之所染污，當知是名內心散動。若依外相，於內等持所行諸相，作意思惟，名相散動。若內作意為緣，生起所有諸受，由麁重身計我起慢，當知是名麁重散動。」
<<< “Kulaputra! They should know there are five kinds: 1. Distractions of mental attention; 2. Distractions from outside the mind (citta); 3. Distractions from inside the mind; 4. Distractions of characteristics; 5. Distractions of ‘Coarse Heaviness’.

Kulaputra! If a bodhisattva relinquishes attending to what is appropriate to the Great Vehicle and falls into attending to everything appropriate to voice hearers or the solitary enlightened, you should know, this is called distractions of mental attention. If one’s mind becomes scattered among all the inverting characteristics of the five kinds of wonderous external desires, vexations accompanying thoughts pursuing external objects, you should know, this is called distraction from outside the mind. If one is stupefied by laziness, or in oblivion, or in love with the taste of samāpatti (attainments), or defiled by the accompanying passion for a particular samāpatti, you should know, this is called distractions from inside the mind. If one is dependent upon external characteristics  (images) when contemplating internally all the characteristics of [their] conditioning, this is distraction by characteristics. If internally one attends to sensations that arise conditionally and yet, because of the coarse heaviness of the body, imagines a self and engenders pride, you should know, this is called Distractions of ‘Coarse Heaviness’.”  
>>> 「世尊！此奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，從初菩薩地乃至如來地，能對治何障？」
<<< “World-Honored One! This śamatha and vipaśyanā, **from the initial bodhisattva stage up to the stage of Thus Come One, what obstructions are they able to counteract?”
>>> 「善男子！此奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，於初地中，對治惡趣煩惱業生雜染障。第二地中，對治微細誤犯現行障。第三地中，對治欲貪障。第四地中，對治定愛及法愛障。第五地中，對治生死涅槃一向背趣障。第六地中，對治相多現行障。第七地中，對治細相現行障。第八地中，對治於無相作功用及於有相不得自在障。第九地中，對治於一切種善巧言辭不得自在障。第十地中，對治不得圓滿法身證得障。善男子！此奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，於如來地，對治極微細最極微細煩惱障及所知障。由能永害如是障故，究竟證得無著無礙一切智見。依於所作成滿所緣，建立最極清淨法身。」
<<< “Kulaputra! This śamatha and vipaśyanā, in the initial bodhisattva stage, counteracts the obstruction of afflicted karma that leads to evil destinies and the arising of defilement. In the second stage, the obstruction of the appearance of subtle transgressions is counteracted. In the third stage, the obstruction of craving is counteracted. In the fourth stage, the obstruction of the love of meditation and even love of the Dharma is counteracted. In the fifth stage, the obstruction of being singularly focused on rejecting birth & death for Nirvana is counteracted. In the sixth stage, the obstruction of the appearance of gross characteristics is counteracted. In the seventh stage, the obstruction of the appearance of subtle characteristics is counteracted. In the eighth stage, the obstruction of not having attained mastery of the usefulness of characteristiclessness and the unattainability of characteristics is counteracted. In the ninth stage, the obstruction of not having attained mastery of all the various kinds of skillful speech and diction is counteracted. In the tenth stage, the obstruction of not having attained realization of the perfect Dharma Body is counteracted. Kulaputra! This śamatha and vipaśyanā, in the stage of a Thus Come One, counteracts the obstruction of the most subtle affliction and the obstruction to the knowable. Since they are thus able to completely eradicate these obstructions, they ultimately realize unattached and unhindered All-Knowledge. Based upon the conditions of this accomplishment of [their] objective, they are installed in the ultimately pure Dharma Body.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！云何菩薩依奢摩他、毘鉢舍那勤修行故，證得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, ‘World-Honored One! How is that bodhisattvas cultivating practice based upon this śamatha and vipaśyanā realize attainment of anuttarā-saṃyak-saṃbodhi?”
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！若諸菩薩已得奢摩他、毘鉢舍那，依七真如，於如所聞所思法中，由勝定心，於善審定、於善思量、於善安立真如性中，內正思惟。彼於真如正思惟故，心於一切細相現行尚能棄捨，何況麁相？善男子！言細相者，謂心所執受相，或領納相，或了別相，或雜染清淨相，或內相，或外相，或內外相，或謂我當修行一切利有情相，或正智相，或真如相，或苦集滅道相，或有為相，或無為相，或有常相，或無常相，或苦有變異性相，或苦無變異性相，或有為異相相，或有為同相相，或知一切是一切已有一切相，或補特伽羅無我相，或法無我相。於彼現行，心能棄捨。
<<< The Buddha replied to Maitreya Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! If bodhisattvas who have attained śamatha and vipaśyanā rely upon the Seven Suchnesses among all the Dharma they have heard and pondered, then this supremely concentrated mind internally correctly comprehends (samyak-saṃkalpa) the nature of True Suchness among everything well considered, well examined, and well established. Due to that correct comprehension of True Suchness, the mind is able to relinquish attachment to the appearance of the most minute characteristics, how much more so the gross? Kulaputra! Minute characteristics are what are called: characteristics appropriated by mind; the characteristic of being experienced; differentiating characteristics; characteristics of purity and defilement; the characteristic of interiority; the characteristic of exteriority; the characteristic of both interiority and exteriority; the characteristic of what is considered the self cultivating practice for the benefit of all sentient beings; the characteristic of Correct Knowledge; the characteristic of True Suchness; the characteristics of suffering, its accumulation, its cessation, and the Path; the characteristic of being conditioned; the characteristic of the unconditioned; the characteristic of being eternal; the characteristic of being impermanent; the characteristic of suffering having a nature transmutable into something different; the characteristic of suffering being without a nature transmutable into something different; the characteristic of the difference between all the characteristics of the conditioned; the characteristic of the similarity between all the characteristics of the conditioned; the characteristic of the knowledge of everything already being everything; the characteristic of a selfless pudgala; or the characteristic of Dharma without self. With the appearance of that, the mind is able to relinquish attachment.”
>>> 「彼既多住如是行故，於時時間，從其一切繫蓋散動，善修治心。從是已後，於七真如，有七各別自內所證通達智生，名為見道。由得此故，名入菩薩正性離生，生如來家，證得初地，又能受用此地勝德。彼於先時，由得奢摩他、毘鉢舍那故，已得二種所緣，謂有分別影像所緣，及無分別影像所緣。彼於今時得見道故，更證得事邊際所緣。復於後後一切地中，進修修道，即於如是三種所緣作意思惟。譬如有人，以其細楔出於麁楔。如是菩薩，依此以楔出楔方便，遣內相故，一切隨順雜染分相皆悉除遣。相除遣故，麁重亦遣。永害一切相麁重故，漸次於彼後後地中，如煉金法陶煉其心。乃至證得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提，又得所作成滿所緣。
<<< “From persistently abiding in practice like this, in the interim, they well cultivate a controlled mind from all bindings, coverings, distractions and movements. After this, seven individual inner realizations of all-pervasive knowledge arise from the Seven Suchnesses called Seeing the Way. Due to this attainment, they are called bodhisattvas of a nature correctly free of [re]birth, born into the family of Thus Come Ones, attaining realization of the initial stage, and able to experience the magnificent virtues of this stage. When they are in the initial stage, since they have attained śamatha and vipaśyanā, they have already attained two kinds of ‘objects’ (ālambana): objects with different appearances, and also objects without different appearances. And, because they have now attained Seeing the Way, they also realize attainment of the limit of objects. Just like someone who removes a large wedge by means of a small wedge. Like this, these bodhisattvas, relying on the upāya of extracting a wedge with a wedge, getting rid of the characteristic of interiority, completely gets rid of all subsequent defiled and differentiated characteristics. Because characteristics are gotten rid of, the ‘coarse heaviness’ is also gotten rid of. Because they forever eliminate the coarse heaviness of all characteristics, during each of the stages onward, the mind is gradually refined, as one refines gold, until they realize attainment of anuttarā-saṃyak-saṃbodhi and attain the object that goes along with its fulfillment.”
>>> 「善男子！如是菩薩於內止觀正修行故，證得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提。」
<<< “Kulaputra! Because bodhisattvas cultivate correct practice and correct observation interiorly like this, they realize attainment of anuttarā-saṃyak-saṃbodhi.”

The Awesome Virtues of Bodhisattvas
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！云何修行引發菩薩廣大威德？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! How does one cultivate practice so as to generate the immense, awesome virtue of Bodhisattvas?"
>>> 「善男子！若諸菩薩善知六處，便能引發菩薩所有廣大威德：一者、善知心生；二者、善知心住；三者、善知心出；四者、善知心增；五者、善知心減；六者、善知方便。
<<< “Kulaputra! If bodhisattvas are well aware of six bases they will be able to generate the immense, awesome virtue of bodhisattvas. 1. Being well aware of the arising of mind; 2. Being well aware of the abiding of mind; 3. Being well aware of the departure of mind; 4. Being well aware of the increase of mind; 5. Being well aware of the decrease of mind; 6. Being well aware of upāya.
>>> 「云何善知心生？謂如實知十六行心生起差別，是名善知心生。十六行心生起差別者：一者、不可覺知堅住器識生，謂阿陀那識；二者、種種行相所緣識生，謂頓取一切色等境界分別意識，及頓取內外境界覺受，或頓於一念瞬息須臾，現入多定，見多佛土，見多如來，分別意識；三者、小相所緣識生，謂欲界繫識；四者、大相所緣識生，謂色界繫識；五者、無量相所緣識生，謂空、識、無邊處繫識；六者、微細相所緣識生，謂無所有處繫識；七者、邊際相所緣識生，謂非想非非想處繫識；八者、無相識生，謂出世識及緣滅識；九者、苦俱行識生，謂地獄識；十者、雜受俱行識生，謂欲行識；十一、喜俱行識生，謂初二靜慮識；十二、樂俱行識生，謂第三靜慮識；十三、不苦不樂俱行識生，謂從第四靜慮乃至非想非非想處識；十四、染污俱行識生，謂諸煩惱及隨煩惱相應識；十五、善俱行識生，謂信等相應識；十六、無記俱行識生，謂彼俱不相應識。
<<< “How is one well aware of the arising of mind? It is to have true knowledge of sixteen activities that give rise to mind and bring about differentiation, this is called being well aware of the arising of mind. The sixteen activities that give rise to mind and bring about differentiation are: 1. The arising of the unintelligible, steadily abiding receptacle consciousness, which is the ādāna (’appropriating’) consciousness; 2. The arising of a conditional consciousness based upon all kinds of activity and characteristics, which is the differentiating manas consciousness that immediately apprehends all the realms of objects of material form, [sounds, scents, etc.], and immediately apprehends internal and external realms, or immediately, in a single thought [moment], in the span of a kṣaṇa, enters many concentrations, sees many Buddha Lands, and sees many Thus Come Ones; 3. The arising of conditional consciousness from minor characteristics, which is consciousness caught up in the Realm of Desire; 4. The arising of conditional consciousness from major characteristics, which is consciousness caught up in the Realm of Form; 5. The arising of conditional consciousness from immeasurable characteristics, which is consciousness caught up in Emptiness, Consciousness, and bases of limitlessness; 6. The arising of conditional consciousness from minute characteristics, which is consciousness caught up in bases of non-existence; 7. The arising of conditional consciousness from the characteristic of limitation, which is consciousness caught up in the base of niether perception nor non-perception; 8. The arising of consciousness of characteristiclessness, which is transcendent consciousness and the extinction of conditional consciousness; 9. The arising of consciousness active in tandem with suffering, which is consciousness of the Hell Realms; 10. The arising of consciousness active in tandem with the variety of experiences, which is consciousness of actions of desire; 11. The arising of consciousness active in tandem with joy, which is consciousness of the first two meditative states; 12. The arising of consciousness active in tandem with bliss, which is consciousness of the third meditative state; 13. The arising of consciousness active in tandem with neither suffering nor bliss, which is consciousness of the fourth meditative state up to the base of neither perception nor non-perception; 14. The arising of consciousness active in tandem with defilement, which is consciousness that goes along with all the afflictions and characteristics of affiction; 15. The arising of consciousness active in tandem with excellence, which is consciousness associated with faith and other such characteristics; 16. The arising of consciousness active in tandem with neutrality (’no record’), which is consciousness unassociated with either of those [14 or 15].”
>>> 「云何善知心住？謂如實知了別真如。
<<< “How is one well aware of the abiding of mind? It is truly knowing differentiating [and] True Suchness.”
>>> 「云何善知心出？謂如實知出二種縛：所謂相縛及麁重縛。此能善知，應令其心從如是出。
<<< “How is one well aware of the departure of mind? It is truly knowing departing from the two kinds of bonds: which are the bonds of characteristics and the bonds of coarse heaviness. Being well aware, one thus causes the mind to depart from them.”
>>> 「云何善知心增？謂如實知能治相縛、麁重縛心，彼增長時，彼積集時，亦得增長，亦得積集，名善知增。
<<< “How is one well aware of the increase of mind? This is truly knowing the mind that is able to control the bonds of characteristics and the bonds of coarse heaviness, and when they increase and grow, when they gather and accumulate, [that mind] also increases and grows, [it] also gathers and accumulates. This is called being well aware of increasing.”
>>> 「云何善知心減？謂如實知彼所對治相，及麁重所雜染心，彼衰退時，彼損減時，此亦衰退，此亦損減，名善知減。
<<< “How is one well aware of the decrease of mind? This is truly knowing the controlling effects of characteristics and the defiling mind (thoughts) of coarse heaviness and, when those recede, when those decrease, this also recedes, this also decreases. This is called being well aware of decreasing.”
>>> 「云何善知方便？謂如實知解脫、勝處、及與遍處，或修或遣。
<<< “How is one well aware of upāya? This is truly knowing the Liberations, the victorious Bases, up to the Bases of Totality, in cultivation or in dispensation.”
>>> 「善男子！如是菩薩，於諸菩薩廣大威德，或已引發、或當引發、或現引發。」
<<< “Kulaputra! Bodhisattvas thus either have generated, will generate, or are presently generating all the immense, awesome virtues of bodhisattvas.”
>>> 慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如世尊說：『於無餘依涅槃界中，一切諸受無餘永滅。』何等諸受於此永滅？」
<<< Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Have the World-Honored One has said, ‘Abiding within the realm of Nirvana without remainder all sensations are forever extinguished without remainder.’ What are these sensations that are forever extinguished?”
>>> 「善男子！以要言之，有二種受無餘永滅。何等為二？一者、所依麁重受；二者、彼果境界受。所依麁重受，當知有四種：一者、有色所依受；二者、無色所依受；三者、果已成滿麁重受；四者、果未成滿麁重受。果已成滿受者，謂現在受。果未成滿受者，謂未來因受。彼果境界受，亦有四種：一者、依持受；二者、資具受；三者、受用受；四者、顧戀受。於有餘依涅槃界中，果未成滿受一切已滅，領彼對治明觸生受，領受共有。或復彼果已成滿受。又二種受，一切已滅。唯現領受，明觸生受。於無餘依涅槃界中般涅槃時，此亦永滅。是故說言於無餘依涅槃界中，一切諸受無餘永滅。」
<<< “Kulaputra! Essentially speaking, there are two types of sensations extinguished forever without remainder. What two? 1. Sensations of abiding in coarse heaviness; 2. Sensations of objects resulting therefrom.”

“Sensations of abiding in coarse heaviness, you should know, are of four types: 1. Sensations of there being [physical] form; 2. Sensations of formlessness; 3. Sensations of the results of coarse heaviness already developed; 4. Sensations of the results of coarse heaviness not yet developed.”

“The results of coarse heaviness already developed are what are presently being experienced (sensed). The results of coarse heaviness not yet developed are the objects of sensation that have not yet arrived.”

“The sensations of the realm of resulting objects is of four types: 1. Sensations of the basis of support; 2. Sensations of requisites; 3. Sensations of a sense of use; 4. Sensations of fondness.”

“Within the realm of Nirvana with remainder, sensations of results not yet fulfilled have all already been extinguished, leading to the sensation that arises from being in contact with wisdom (luminousness), leading to a sensation that is always present. And, those sensations of results already fulfilled are also of two kinds of sensations, all of which are already extinguished: sensations that are just being experienced and sensations arising from being in contact with wisdom. When one is abiding in the parinirvana of the Nirvana without remainder, these are also forever extinguished. For this reason it is said that within the Nirvana without remainder all sensations are forever extinguished without remainder.”
>>> 爾時，世尊說是語已，復告慈氏菩薩曰：「善哉，善哉！善男子！汝今善能依止圓滿最極清淨妙瑜伽道，請問如來。汝於瑜伽，已得決定，最極善巧。吾已為汝宣說圓滿最極清淨妙瑜伽道，所有一切過去、未來正等覺者，已說、當說皆亦如是。諸善男子、若善女人，皆應依此勇猛精進，當正修學！」
<<< At that time, after the World-Honored One had finished speaking, he further told Maitreya Bodhisattva, “Excellent, excellent! Kulaputra! You now are well able, based upon resting in  fulfillment of the extremely pure wonderous way of Yoga, to inquire of the Thus Come One. You have already definitely attained it with utmost skill. I have already explained to you the fully complete, most utterly pure wonderous way of Yoga, which has been and will be explained by all correctly awakened ones, or will be explained also like this. Kulaputra, sons and good daughters, should all correctly cultivate and study like this, courageously with virya!
>>> 爾時，世尊欲重宣此義，而說頌曰：
<<< At that time, the World-Honored One, to emphasize his meaning, spoke in verse saying:
>>> 於法假立瑜伽中，　　
若行放逸失大義；　
依止此法及瑜伽，　　
若正修行得大覺。
<<< Within the Yoga of provisionally established dharma,
If one practices negligently, one loses great benefit;
Based upon Yoga that rests on this Dharma,
If one practices correct cultivation, one attains Great Awakening
>>> 見有所得求免離，　　
若謂此見為得法，　
慈氏彼去瑜伽遠，　　
譬如大地與虛空。
<<< Seeing that there is something to attain in the search for escape,
If one says this [way of] seeing is attaining the Dharma,
Maitreya, one is as far from Yoga
As the earth is from the sky.
>>> 利生堅固而不作，　　
悟已勤修利有情，　
智者作此窮劫量，　　
便得最上離染喜。
<<< Those who do not work for the benefit and stability of the living,
Once enlightened, are not moved to benefiting sentient beings,
The wise do the work throughout kalpas,
And they attain supreme, undefiled joy.
>>> 若人為欲而說法，　　
彼名捨欲還取欲，　
愚癡得法無價寶，　　
反更遊行而乞匃。
<<< If someone explains the Dharma out of desire,
That is called relinquishing desire only to grasp desire again.
Fools who attain the priceless jewel of the Dharma,
Yet continue to wander about begging.
>>> 於諍諠雜戲論著，　　
應捨發起上精進，　
為度諸天及世間，　　
於此瑜伽汝當學！」
<<< Clinging to argumentation and opinions,
Which they should relinquish, and bring about superior virya,
For the liberation of all gods and worldlings,
You should study this Yoga.
>>> 爾時，慈氏菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！於是解深密法門中，當何名此教？我當云何奉持？」
<<< At that time, Maitreya Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! From within this Dharma Door that Reveals the Secret, what should we call this teaching? How should I honor and remember it?”
>>> 佛告慈氏菩薩曰：「善男子！此名瑜伽了義之教，於此瑜伽了義之教汝當奉持。」
<<< The Buddha told Maitreya Bodhisattva, “Kulaputra! This is called the Teaching of the Definitive Meaning of Yoga, as the Teaching of the Definitive Meaning of Yoga is how you should honor and remember it.”
>>> 說此瑜伽了義教時，於大會中，有六百千眾生，發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心；三百千聲聞，遠塵離垢，於諸法中，得法眼淨；一百五十千聲聞，諸漏永盡，心得解脫；七十五千菩薩，獲得廣大瑜伽作意。
<<< When this Teaching on the Definitive Meaning of Yoga was explained, six hundred thousand people from among the great assembly generated anuttarā-saṃyak-saṃbodhi-citta; Three hundred thousand voice-hearers became free from defiling dust and attained purified Dharma Eyes regarding all phenomena (dharmas); One hundred fifty thousand voice-hearers ended all their outflows and attained liberated minds; And seventy-five thousand bodhisattvas ‘caught’ attainment of a broad Yoga Mind-State.”

>>> 地波羅蜜多
<<< Chapter 7 - Bhumis and Paramitas
>>> 爾時，觀自在菩薩白佛言：「世尊！如佛所說菩薩十地，所謂極喜地、離垢地、發光地、焰慧地、極難勝地、現前地、遠行地、不動地、善慧地、法雲地；復說佛地為第十一。如是諸地，幾種清淨？幾分所攝？」
<<< At that time, Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! As the Buddha has explained the ten bodhisattva stages as: the stage of Extreme Joy, the stage of Purity, the stage of Refulgence, the stage of Blazing Intellect, the stage of the Difficult to Conquer, the stage of Manifestation, the stage of Gone Afar, the stage of Immovability, the stage of Good Intellect, and the stage of Dharma Cloud. You have further explained the stage of Buddha as an eleventh. The stages being thus, how many purities are there? How many parts do they encompass (saṃgraha)”
>>> 爾時，世尊告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！當知諸地四種清淨、十一分攝？
<<< At that time, the World-Honored One replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! You should know, the four kinds of purity of the stages, encompassing eleven parts.
>>> 「云何名為四種清淨能攝諸地？謂增上意樂清淨攝於初地；增上戒清淨攝第二地；增上心清淨攝第三地；增上慧清淨於後後地轉勝妙故，當知能攝從第四地乃至佛地。善男子！當知如是四種清淨普攝諸地。
<<< “What does it mean to say that the stages encompass four kinds of purity?

There is the increasingly superior purity of ‘mind-joy’ (manobhirāma) integral to the Initial Stage.

There is the increasingly superior purity of moral discipline integral to the Second Stage.

There is the increasingly superior purity of Mind integral to the Third Stage.

And there is the increasingly superior purity of intellect from the supremely wonderous ‘turning’ of those [previous] stages that, you should know, is integral from the Fourth Stage to the Stage of Buddhahood.

Kulaputra! You should know, these four kinds of purities universally encompass the stages.”
>>> 「云何名為十一種分能攝諸地？謂諸菩薩先於勝解行地，依十法行，極善修習勝解忍故，超過彼地，證入菩薩正性離生。彼諸菩薩由是因緣，此分圓滿。而未能於微細毀犯誤現行中正知而行，由是因緣，於此分中猶未圓滿。為令此分得圓滿故，精勤修習便能證得，彼諸菩薩由是因緣，此分圓滿。而未能得世間圓滿、等持、等至及圓滿聞持陀羅尼，由是因緣，於此分中猶未圓滿。為令此分得圓滿故，精勤修習便能證得，彼諸菩薩由是因緣，此分圓滿。而未能令隨所獲得菩提分法，多修習住，心未能捨諸等至愛及與法愛，由是因緣，於此分中猶未圓滿。為令此分得圓滿故，精勤修習便能證得，彼諸菩薩由是因緣，此分圓滿。而未能於諸諦道理如實觀察，又未能於生死涅槃棄捨一向背趣作意，又未能修方便所攝菩提分法，由是因緣，於此分中猶未圓滿。為令此分得圓滿故，精勤修習便能證得，彼諸菩薩由是因緣，此分圓滿。而未能於生死流轉如實觀察，又由於彼多生厭故，未能多住無相作意，由是因緣，於此分中猶未圓滿。為令此分得圓滿故，精勤修習便能證得，彼諸菩薩由是因緣，此分圓滿。而未能令無相作意、無缺、無間、多修習住，由是因緣，於此分中猶未圓滿。為令此分得圓滿故，精勤修習便能證得，彼諸菩薩由是因緣，此分圓滿。而未能於無相住中捨離功用，又未能得於相自在，由是因緣，於此分中猶未圓滿。為令此分得圓滿故，精勤修習便能證得，彼諸菩薩由是因緣，此分圓滿。而未能於異名眾相、訓詞差別、一切品類宣說法中，得大自在，由是因緣，於此分中猶未圓滿。為令此分得圓滿故，精勤修習便能證得，彼諸菩薩由是因緣，此分圓滿。而未能得圓滿法身現前證受，由是因緣，於此分中猶未圓滿。為令此分得圓滿故，精勤修習便能證得，彼諸菩薩由是因緣，此分圓滿。而未能得遍於一切所知境界無著、無礙、妙智、妙見，由是因緣，於此分中猶未圓滿。為令此分得圓滿故，精勤修習便能證得，由是因緣，此分圓滿。此分滿故，於一切分皆得圓滿。善男子！當知如是十一種分普攝諸地。」
<<< “What does it mean to say that eleven parts encompass the stages?

Bodhisattvas on the initial stage of supreme, liberating practice, due to their extremely excellent cultivation of supremely liberated patience (kṣānti) reliant upon the practice of Ten Dharmas*, transcend that stage and enter realization of the correct nature of bodhisattvas being beyond birth. From these causes and conditions, bodhisattvas fulfill this part.

copying, honoring, propagating, attending to, reading, maintaining, explaining, reciting, pondering, and cultivating

Yet, those bodhisattvas are still unable to correctly know and then act in regard to the appearance of subtle errors and mistakes, and from these causes and conditions, during this part they remain unfilled. In order to attain fulfillment of this part, they cultivate with the determination and are able to attain realization. From these causes and conditions, bodhisattvas fulfill this part.

Yet, those bodhisattvas have still not attained world fulfilling (transcending) equanimous  retention and [the perfect] hearing retention dhāraṇī, and from these causes and conditions, during this part they remain unfilled. In order to attain fulfillment of this part, they cultivate with the determination and are able to attain realization. From these causes and conditions, bodhisattvas fulfill this part.

Yet, they are still unable to be in accord with the Factors of Awakening they may attain, and though they cultivate a lot of abiding, the mind is still unable to relinquish affection for the equanimous and affection for dharma, and from these causes and conditions, during this part they remain unfilled. In order to attain fulfillment of this part, they cultivate with the determination and are able to attain realization. From these causes and conditions, bodhisattvas fulfill this part.

Yet, they are still unable to examine the principles of the Path of Truth as they really are, still unable to relinquish attachment to one-sided attraction or aversion for birth and death and Nirvana, and still unable to cultivate skillful means that harmonize (embrace) the Factors of Awakening, and from these causes and conditions, during this part they remain unfilled. In order to attain fulfillment of this part, they cultivate with the determination and are able to attain realization. From these causes and conditions, bodhisattvas fulfill this part.

Yet, they are still unable to examine transformations within the flow of birth and death as they really are, and also, from frequently developing revulsion toward so many [re]births, they are still unable to abide for long in characteristicless states of mind, and from these causes and conditions, during this part they remain unfilled. In order to attain fulfillment of this part, they cultivate with the determination and are able to attain realization. From these causes and conditions, bodhisattvas fulfill this part.

Yet, they are still unable to cause characteristicless states of mind without pause or interruption by cultivating long periods of abiding, and from these causes and conditions, during this part they remain unfilled. In order to attain fulfillment of this part, they cultivate with the determination and are able to attain realization. From these causes and conditions, bodhisattvas fulfill this part.

Yet, they are still unable to let go of purpose [use, function] while abiding in the  characteristicless, and have still not attained sovereignty over characteristics, and from these causes and conditions, during this part they remain unfilled. In order to attain fulfillment of this part, they cultivate with the determination and are able to attain realization. From these causes and conditions, bodhisattvas fulfill this part.

Yet, they are still unable to attain Great Sovereignty over different terms, groups, and characteristics, different ways of saying things, and all the different categories and interpretations of dharmas, and from these causes and conditions, during this part they remain unfilled. In order to attain fulfillment of this part, they cultivate with the determination and are able to attain realization. From these causes and conditions, bodhisattvas fulfill this part.

Yet, they are still unable to attain fulfillment of the realization of the appearance of the Dharma Body, and from these causes and conditions, during this part they remain unfilled. In order to attain fulfillment of this part, they cultivate with the determination and are able to attain realization. From these causes and conditions, bodhisattvas fulfill this part.

Yet, they are still unable to attain all-pervasive, subtle knowledge and subtle vision of all knowable realms of existence without attachment and without obstruction, and from these causes and conditions, during this part they remain unfilled. In order to attain fulfillment of this part, they cultivate with the determination and are able to attain realization. From these causes and conditions, bodhisattvas fulfill this part.

Since this part attains fulfillment, all parts attain fulfillment. Kulaputra! You should know, like this, eleven parts encompass the stages.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！何緣最初名極喜地？乃至何緣說名佛地？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Why is it initially called the stage of Extreme Joy? And why is it then also called the stage of Buddha?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！成就大義，得未曾得出世間心，生大歡喜，是故最初名極喜地。遠離一切微細犯戒，是故第二名離垢地。由彼所得三摩地及聞持陀羅尼，能為無量智光依止，是故第三名發光地。由彼所得菩提分法，燒諸煩惱，智如火焰，是故第四名焰慧地。由即於彼菩提分法，方便修習最極艱難，方得自在，是故第五名極難勝地。現前觀察諸行流轉，又於無相多修作意方現在前，是故第六名現前地。能遠證入無缺無間無相作意，與清淨地共相隣接，是故第七名遠行地。由於無相得無功用，於諸相中不為現行煩惱所動，是故第八名不動地。於一切種說法自在，獲得無罪廣大智慧，是故第九名善慧地。麁重之身，廣如虛空，法身圓滿，譬如大雲，皆能遍覆，是故第十名法雲地。永斷最極微細煩惱及所知障，無著無礙，於一切種所知境界，現正等覺，故第十一說名佛地。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! Accomplishing great meaning and attaining a transcendent mind not hitherto attained in the world, there arises great delight and joy, and for this reason it is initially called the stage of Extreme Joy. Being far removed from all the minutest infractions of discipline, the second is called the stage of Purity. Having attained the stages of samādhi up to [the perfect] hearing retention dhāraṇī, which are the basis of support for the immeasurable Light of Wisdom, the third is called the stage of Refulgence. Having attained the Dharmas of the Factors of Awakening, all afflictions are burned away, knowledge being like flames of a fire, for this reason the fourth is called the stage of Blazing Intellect. Having skillfully cultivated what is extremely difficult about the Dharmas of the Factors of Awakening through mastery of skillfulness, the fifth is called the stage Extremely Difficult to Conquer. Observing the flow of transformations of saṃskāra manifest before them, and also from continual cultivation of mind-states on characteristiclessness, it manifests before them, the sixth is called the stage of Manifestation. Being able to enter far-reaching realization of a mind-state without pause or interruption and without characteristics, having parity with the characteristic of the stage of purity, the seventh is called the stage of Gone Afar. Having attained purposelessness in regard to characteristiclessness, and being among all characteristics but not being moved by the appearance of afflictions, the eighth is called the stage of Immovability. Obtaining infallible, expansive intellect, and mastery of all kinds of explanations of the Dharma, the ninth is called the stage of Good Intellect. The body of ‘coarse heaviness’ being as broad as vacuous space, the Dharma Body being fulfilled, just like a great cloud, able to completely cover everything, the tenth is called the stage of Dharma Cloud. Forever having severed the most minute, subtle afflictions and barriers to knowledge, without attachment, without obstruction, having correctly awakened to every kind of knowable realm, the eleventh is said to be the stage of Buddha.
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「於此諸地有幾愚癡、有幾麁重為所對治？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “How much ignorance (avidyā) is there in these stages, and how much ‘coarse heaviness’ is to be counteracted?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！此諸地中有二十二種愚癡、十一種麁重為所對治。謂於初地有二愚癡：一者、執著補特伽羅及法愚癡，二者、惡趣雜染愚癡；及彼麁重為所對治。於第二地有二愚癡：一者、微細誤犯愚癡，二者、種種業趣愚癡；及彼麁重為所對治。於第三地有二愚癡：一者、欲貪愚癡，二者、圓滿聞持陀羅尼愚癡；及彼麁重為所對治。於第四地有二愚癡：一者、等至愛愚癡，二者、法愛愚癡；及彼麁重為所對治。於第五地有二愚癡：一者、一向作意棄背生死愚癡，二者、一向作意趣向涅槃愚癡；及彼麁重為所對治。於第六地有二愚癡：一者、現前觀察諸行流轉愚癡，二者、相多現行愚癡；及彼麁重為所對治。於第七地有二愚癡：一者、微細相現行愚癡，二者一向無相作意方便愚癡；及彼麁重為所對治。於第八地有二愚癡：一者、於無相作功用愚癡，二者、於相自在愚癡；及彼麁重為所對治。於第九地有二愚癡：一者、於無量說法、無量法句文字、後後慧辯陀羅尼自在愚癡，二者辯才自在愚癡；及彼麁重為所對治。於第十地有二愚癡：一者、大神通愚癡，二者、悟入微細祕密愚癡；及彼麁重為所對治。於如來地有二愚癡：一者、於一切所知境界極微細著愚癡，二者、極微細礙愚癡；及彼麁重為所對治。
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! Within these stages there are twenty-two kinds of ignorance, and eleven kinds of ‘coarse heaviness’ to be counteracted.”

“In the Initial Stage there are two [kinds of] ignorance: 1. The ignorance of clinging to the pudgala and dharmas, and, 2. Ignorance of what leads to an evil rebirth; The ‘coarse heaviness’ of those is what is counteracted.”

“In the Second Stage there are two [kinds of] ignorance: 1. The ignorance of subtle transgressions and, 2. Ignorance of where all the various karmic actions lead; The The ‘coarse heaviness’ of those is what is counteracted.”

“In the Third Stage there are two [kinds of] ignorance: 1. The ignorance of desirousness, and 2. Ignorance of perfection of the hearing retention dhāraṇī; The ‘coarse heaviness’ of those is what is counteracted.”

“In the Fourth Stage there are two [kinds of] ignorance: 1. The ignorance of being in love with arriving at equanimity and, 2. Ignorantly loving Dharma (dharma?); The ‘coarse heaviness’ of those is what is counteracted.”

“In the Fifth Stage there are two [kinds of] ignorance: 1. The ignorance of being singularly focused on rejecting birth & death and, 2. The ignorance of being singularly focused on being directed toward Nirvana; The ‘coarse heaviness’ of those is what is counteracted.”

“In the Sixth Stage there are two [kinds of] ignorance: 1. The ignorance of bringing to presence and observing continuity within the flow of conditioned actions (saṃskāra), and, 2. The ignorance of frequently bringing to presence images; The ‘coarse heaviness’ of those is what is counteracted.”

“In the Seventh Stage there are two [kinds of] ignorance: 1. The ignorance of bringing to presence subtle characteristics of conditioned actions, and, 2. the ignorance of being singularly focused on bring to mind characteristiclessness as an upayā; The ‘coarse heaviness’ of those is what is counteracted.”

“In the Eighth Stage there are two [kinds of] ignorance: 1. The ignorance of making effort toward characteristiclessness, and 2. Ignorance of being sovereign over characteristics; The ‘coarse heaviness’ of those is what is counteracted.”

“In the Ninth Stage there are two [kinds of] ignorance: 1. Ignorance of the sovereign mastery of wise elocution of immeasurable explanations of the Dharma, immeasurable words, phrases and collections of Dharma and their dhāraṇīs, and, 2. Ignorance of the sovereign mastery of interpretation; The ‘coarse heaviness’ of those is what is counteracted.”  

“In the Tenth Stage there are two [kinds of] ignorance: 1. Ignorance of Great Spiritual Power, and 2. Ignorance of awakened entry into the subtle mysteries; The ‘coarse heaviness’ of those is what is counteracted.”

“In the Stage of a Thus Come One there are two [kinds of] ignorance: 1. The ignorance of an extremely subtle attachment to all knowable realms, and, 2. The ignorance of extremely subtle obstacles; The ‘coarse heaviness’ of those is what is counteracted.”
>>> 「善男子！由此二十二種愚癡及十一種麁重故，安立諸地；而阿耨多羅三藐三菩提離彼繫縛。」
<<< “Kulaputra! Since there are these twenty-two kinds of ignorance and eleven types of ‘coarse heaviness,’ the Stages have been well-established; And anuttarā-saṃyak-saṃbodhi transcends the bondage of [all] that.”  
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！阿耨多羅三藐三菩提甚奇希有，乃至成就大利大果，令諸菩薩能破如是大愚癡羅網，能越如是大麁重稠林，現前證得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提。」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Anuttarā-saṃyak-saṃbodhi is most rare indeed, for it is the achievement of the great benefit, the great result, whereby all bodhisattvas are enabled to break asunder the net of great ignorance, are enabled to pass through the forest of great ‘coarse heaviness’ and realize anuttarā-saṃyak-saṃbodhi in the present.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如是諸地，幾種殊勝之所安立？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! The Stages being thus, how many kinds of excellence are they established by.”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！略有八種：一者、增上意樂清淨；二者、心清淨；三者、悲清淨；四者、到彼岸清淨；五者、見佛供養承事清淨；六者、成熟有情清淨；七者、生清淨；八者、威德清淨。
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! In brief, there are eight kinds: 1. Purity of superior thoughtfulness; 2. Purity of mind; 3. Purity of compassion; 4. Purity of reaching the other shore; 5. Purity of seeing Buddhas and making offerings to them; 6. Purity of maturing sentient beings; 7. Purity of birth; and 8. Purity of awe-inspiring respect (tejas).
>>> 「善男子！於初地中，所有增上意樂清淨，乃至威德清淨；後後諸地乃至佛地，所有增上意樂清淨，乃至威德清淨，當知彼諸清淨展轉增勝，唯於佛地除生清淨。又初地中所有功德，於上諸地平等皆有，當知自地功德殊勝。一切菩薩十地功德皆是有上，佛地功德當知無上。」
<<< “Kulaputra! In the Initial Stage, from the Purity of superior thoughtfulness up to the Purity of awe-inspiring respect, and all the other [stages] up to the Stage of Buddha, and their Purity of superior thoughtfulness up to the Purity of awe-inspiring respect, you should know, all of those Purities are excellent, only the Stage of Buddha is without the Purity of Birth. Further, the merit of the Initial Stage is equal to the merit of all the higher stages, but you should know that the merit of each stage is excellent. All ten of the Bodhisattva Stages have something that surpasses them, but the Stage of Buddha is unsurpassable.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！何因緣故說菩薩生，於諸有生最為殊勝？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Why do you say that the birth of a bodhisattva is far superior to the births of all other sentient beings?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！四因緣故：一者、極淨善根所集起故；二者、故意思擇力所取故；三者、悲愍濟度諸眾生故；四者、自能無染除他染故。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! The are four reasons: 1.  Because [that birth] comes about from the most pure good roots; 2. Because it is taken on intentionally, through the power of discernment; 3. Because it compassionately liberates all sentient beings; and 4. Because, [being born] undefiled oneself, one is able to remove the defilements of others."
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！何因緣故說諸菩薩行廣大願、妙願、勝願？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Why do you say that all bodhisattvas perform a great vow, a wondrous vow, a superior vow?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！四因緣故：謂諸菩薩，能善了知涅槃樂住，堪能速證；而復棄捨速證樂住；無緣無待發大願心；為欲利益諸有情故，處多種種長時大苦。是故我說彼諸菩薩行廣大願、妙願、勝願。」
<<< The Buddha told Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva, “Kulaputra! There are four reasons: All bodhisattvas are well able to realize the joy of abiding in Nirvana and could quickly realize it; However, they renounce the rapid realization of that joyful abode; Without cause or necessity, they produce the mind of that great vow; Due to a desire to benefit all sentient beings they remain among great suffering of various kinds for a prolonged time. For these reasons, I have said that they perform a great vow, a wondrous vow, a superior vow.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！是諸菩薩凡有幾種所應學事？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Generally speaking, how many types of things should these bodhisattvas study?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！菩薩學事略有六種：所謂布施、持戒、忍辱、精進、靜慮、慧到彼岸。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! In general, there are six kinds of things the bodhisattva studies, which are: dāna, śīla, kṣānti, vīrya, dhyāna, and prajñā pāramitās.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如是六種所應學事，幾是增上戒學所攝？幾是增上心學所攝？幾是增上慧學所攝？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Of the six things like this that should be studied, how many are included in the study of superior discipline, how many are included in the study of superior mind [states], and how many are included in  superior wisdom?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！當知初三，但是增上戒學所攝；靜慮一種，但是增上心學所攝；慧是增上慧學所攝；我說精進遍於一切。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! You should know the first three are included in the study of superior discipline; dhyāna is the one type included in the study of superior mind [states]; and prajñā is included in the study of superior wisdom. I have explained that vīrya permeates them all.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如是六種所應學事，幾是福德資糧所攝？幾是智慧資糧所攝？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Of the six things like this that should be studied, how many are included in the ‘supplies’ (saṃbhāra) of merit, and how many are included in the ‘supplies’ of wisdom?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！若增上戒學所攝者，是名福德資糧所攝；若增上慧學所攝者，是名智慧資糧所攝；我說精進、靜慮二種遍於一切。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! Whatever is included in the study of superior discipline (i.e. dāna, śīla, and kṣānti) is known as something included in the supplies of merit; whatever is included in the study of superior wisdom (i.e. prajñā) is known as something included in the supplies of wisdom. I have explained that vīrya and dhyāna are two things that permeate both [merit and wisdom].”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！於此六種所學事中，菩薩云何應當修學？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Among these six things to study, how should bodhisattvas cultivate their study.”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！由五種相應當修學：一者、最初於菩薩藏波羅蜜多相應微妙正法教中，猛利信解；二者、次於十種法行，以聞、思、修所成妙智，精進修行；三者、隨護菩提之心；四者、親近真善知識；五者、無間勤修善品。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! There are five kinds of characteristics they should cultivate the study of: 1. From the outset they should have intense faith in the characteristics of the wondrous correct Dharma teachings about the pāramitās found in the bodhisattva treasury; 2. They must zealously cultivate the wondrous wisdom accomplished through hearing, reflecting, and meditating on the ten practices concerning Dharma; 3. They preserve and protect the mind of awakening; 4. The draw near to a spiritual friends (kalyāṇamitra); and 5. They cultivate good qualities without interruption.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！何因緣故，施設如是所應學事，但有六數？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Why are there just six things in number established as the things that should be studied.”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！二因緣故：一者、饒益諸有情故；二者、對治諸煩惱故。當知前三饒益有情，後三對治一切煩惱。前三饒益諸有情者，謂諸菩薩由布施故，攝受資具饒益有情；由持戒故，不行損害逼迫惱亂，饒益有情；由忍辱故，於彼損害逼迫惱亂堪能忍受，饒益有情。後三對治諸煩惱者，謂諸菩薩由精進故，雖未永伏一切煩惱，亦未永害一切隨眠，而能勇猛修諸善品，彼諸煩惱不能傾動善品加行；由靜慮故，永伏煩惱；由般若故，永害隨眠。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! There are two reasons: 1. To benefit sentient beings; and 2. To counteract all the passions. You should, know, the first three [pāramitās] benefit sentient beings, while the latter three counteract all the passions. The first three benefit sentient beings because by dāna all bodhisattvas provide requisites to benefit sentient
beings. By śīla they benefit sentient beings in sparing them from injury, oppression, and irritation. By kṣānti they are able to benefit sentient beings, enabling them to patiently sustain injury, oppression, and irritation. The latter three counteract all the passions, for by vīrya bodhisattvas,
although they may not yet have suppressed all their passions forever or may not yet have eliminated all their passionate inclinations, are able diligently to cultivate good qualities, and all those passions become incapable of reversing their efforts toward goodness. By dhyāna they do suppress their passions forever, and by prajñā they eliminate their passionate inclinations forever.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！何因緣故，施設所餘波羅蜜多，但有四數？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Why have you established the remaining pāramitās as just being four in number?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！由前六種波羅蜜多為助伴故。謂諸菩薩，於前三種波羅蜜多所攝有情，以諸攝事，方便善巧而攝受之，安置善品，是故我說方便善巧波羅蜜多與前三種而為助伴。若諸菩薩，於現法中煩惱多故，於修無間無有堪能，羸劣意樂故、下界勝解故，於內心住無有堪能，於菩薩藏不能聞緣善修習故，所有，不能引發出世間慧。彼便攝受少分狹劣福德資糧，為未來世煩惱輕微，心生正願，如是名願波羅蜜多。由此願故，煩惱微薄，能修精進，是故我說願波羅蜜多與精進波羅蜜多而為助伴。若諸菩薩，親近善士，聽聞正法，如理作意為因緣故，轉劣意樂成勝意樂，亦能獲得上界勝解，如是名力波羅蜜多。由此力故，於內心住有所堪能，是故我說力波羅蜜多與靜慮波羅蜜多而為助伴。若諸菩薩，於菩薩藏，已能聞緣善修習故，能發靜慮，如是名智波羅蜜多。由此智故，堪能引發出世間慧，是故我說智波羅蜜多與慧波羅蜜多而為助伴。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! Because they are aids to the former six pāramitās. Bodhisattvas use the the skillful upāya of the [Four] Means of Unification to embrace sentient beings, unifying them by the first three pāramitās and establishing them in good. Therefore I have explained that upāya pāramitā is an aid to the first three [pāramitās]. If there are bodhisattvas with many afflictions present, incapable of cultivation and continuity, and they have weak wills and inferior aspirations and so are incapable of inner mental stability, and are unable to hear the treasury of bodhisattvas and cultivate good, therefore their dhyāna cannot bring forth transmundane wisdom. Those [bodhisattvas] embrace a little bit of narrow inferior virtue and truly vow in their hearts that in the future their afflictions will diminish. This is called the pāramitā of Vowing. By this Vowing, afflictions are weakened and diligence can be cultivated, so I say that the pāramitā of vowing is an aid to the pāramitā of vīrya. If bodhisattvas draw near to good people, listen to the correct Dharma and think about it reasonably and thereby transform inferior will into superior will, and can also attain higher aspiration, this is called the pāramitā of Power. By this
Power, they have the capability of inner mental abiding, so I say the pāramitā of Power is an aid to the pāramitā of dhyāna. If bodhisattvas are able to hear the treasury of bodhisattva [teachings], focus on what is good, and cultivate its practice, they can develop dhyāna. This is called the pāramitā of Knowledge, by virtue of which Knowledge they are able to bring out transmundane wisdom. Therefore I say that the pāramitā of Knowledge is an aid to the pāramitā of prajñā."
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！何因緣故，宣說六種波羅蜜多如是次第？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Why have you explained the six pāramitās in this order?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！能為後後引發依故。謂諸菩薩，若於身財無所顧悋，便能受持清淨禁戒；為護禁戒，便修忍辱；修忍辱已，能發精進；發精進已，能辦靜慮；具靜慮已，便能獲得出世間慧。是故我說波羅蜜多如是次第。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! Because each is a basis that enables the generating of the next. Which is to say, if bodhisattvas are not obsessed with the body or wealth [i.e. they are generous], then they can keep pure śīla discipline; By guarding that śīla discipline, they cultivate kṣānti patience; Having cultivated kṣānti, they then generate vīrya determination; Having generated vīrya, they are able to carry out dhyāna meditation; Being endowed with dhyāna, they become able to obtain transcendent prajñā wisdom. This is the reason I have explained the pāramitās in this order.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如是六種波羅蜜多，各有幾種品類差別？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! What are the kinds of subdivisions of each of these six pāramitās?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！各有三種。施三種者：一者、法施；二者、財施；三者、無畏施。戒三種者：一者、轉捨不善戒；二者、轉生善戒；三者、轉生饒益有情戒。忍三種者：一者、耐怨害忍；二者、安受苦忍；三者、諦察法忍。精進三種者：一者、被甲精進；二者、轉生善法加行精進；三者、饒益有情加行精進。靜慮三種者：一者、無分別寂靜極寂靜無罪故，對治煩惱眾苦樂住靜慮；二者、引發功德靜慮；三者、引發饒益有情靜慮。慧三種者：一者、緣世俗諦慧；二者、緣勝義諦慧；三者、緣饒益有情慧。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! Each has three kinds [of subdivisions]. The three kinds of giving are: 1. Giving the Dharma, 2. Giving goods, and 3. Giving fearlessness. The three kinds of discipline are: 1. The discipline to turn away from what is not good, 2. The discipline to turn toward what is good, and 3. The discipline to turn toward benefiting sentient beings. The three kinds of patience are: 1. The patience to endure insult and injury, 2. The patience to abide peacefully upon receiving suffering, and 3. The patience to investigate Dharma. The three kinds of vīrya are: 1. Vīrya which protects one like armor, 2. Vīrya to exert effort in engendering good Dharmas, and 3. Vīrya to exert effort in benefiting sentient beings. The three kinds of dhyāna are: 1. The dhyāna of abiding in a joyful mind, which counteracts all the suffering of the passions because it is nondiscriminative, tranquil, very tranquil, and irreproachable, 2. Dhyāna that engenders virtue (merit); and 3. Dhyāna that produces benefit for sentient beings. The three kinds of wisdom are: 1. Wisdom that has as its object worldly, conventional truth, 2. Wisdom that has as its object the truth of ultimate meaning (paramārtha), and 3. Wisdom that has as its object the benefiting of sentient beings. ”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！何因緣故，波羅蜜多說名波羅蜜多？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Why are the pāramitās called pāramitās?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！五因緣故：一者、無染著故；二者、無顧戀故；三者、無罪過故；四者、無分別故；五者、正迴向故。無染著者，謂不染著波羅蜜多諸相違事。無顧戀者，謂於一切波羅蜜多諸果異熟及報恩中心無繫縛。無罪過者，謂於如是波羅蜜多無間雜染法，離非方便行。無分別者，謂於如是波羅蜜多，不如言詞執著自相。正迴向者，謂以如是所作所集波羅蜜多，迴求無上大菩提果。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! There are five reasons: 1. Because they are unattached, 2. Because they are disinterested, 3. Because they are irreproachable, 4. Because they are nondiscriminatory, and 5. Because they correctly transfer [merit]. They are unattached because they are not attached to the opposites of the pāramitās. They are disinterested because the thought [that accompanies them] is not bound to the maturation or reward resulting from any of the pāramitās. They are beyond reproach because such pāramitās have nothing in common with defiled states and are apart from implementing evil means. They are without discrimination because the specific characteristics of these pāramitās do not cling to their literal meaning. They properly transfer [merit]  because such pāramitās, when practiced and accumulated, turn toward and seek the fruit of supreme awakening.”
>>> 「世尊！何等名為波羅蜜多諸相違事？」
<<< “World-Honored One! What are the opposites of these pāramitās?”
>>> 「善男子！當知此事略有六種：一者、於喜樂欲財富自在諸欲樂中，深見功德及與勝利；二者、於隨所樂縱身、語、意而現行中，深見功德及與勝利；三者、於他輕蔑不堪忍中，深見功德及與勝利；四者、於不勤修著欲樂中，深見功德及與勝利；五者、於處憒鬧世雜亂行，深見功德及與勝利；六者、於見、聞、覺、知、言說戲論，深見功德及與勝利。」
<<< “Kulaputra! You should know, there are six kinds of opposites: 1. Seeing profound merit and advantages in all pleasures such as joy, wealth, and power; 2. Seeing profound merit and advantages to indulging in the pleasures of body, speech, and mind; 3. Seeing profound merit and advantages in not being patient when humiliated by others; 4. Seeing profound merit and advantages in not motivating oneself to practice and being attached to pleasures; 5. Seeing profound merit and advantages to the hectic confusion and wild activities of the world; 6. Seeing profound merit and advantages in what is seen, heard, understood, known, talked about, and debated (prapañca).”
>>> 「世尊！如是一切波羅蜜多何果異熟？」
<<< “World-Honored One! What are the varying (vipāka) fruits (results) of each of the pāramitās?”
>>> 「善男子！當知此亦略有六種：一者、得大財富；二者、往生善趣；三者、無怨無壞多諸喜樂；四者、為眾生主；五者、身無惱害；六者、有大宗葉。」
<<< “Kulaputra! You should know, also generally speaking there are six kinds: 1. The attainment of great wealth; 2. Rebirth in good destinies; 3. Great pleasure and total joy without enemies or ruin; 4. Rulership among sentient beings; 5. A body without affliction or injury; 6. Being of great renown. (’having a great clan of petals’).”
>>> 「世尊！何等名為波羅蜜多間雜染法？」
<<< “World-Honored One! What are things that adulterate (’stain’) the pāramitās?”
>>> 「善男子！當知略由四種加行：一者、無悲加行故；二者、不如理加行故；三者、不常加行故；四者、不慇重加行故。不如理加行者，謂修行餘波羅蜜多時，於餘波羅蜜多遠離失壞。」
<<< “Kulaputra! You should know, in general it because of four kinds of intensified effort (prayoga): 1. Due to intensified effort without compassion; 2. Due to intensified effort that is not logical; 3. Due intensified effort that is not consistent; and 4. Due to intensified effort without consideration. Intensified effort that is not logical means cultivating one pāramitā while straying far from and losing the other pāramitās.”
>>> 「世尊！何等名為非方便行？」
<<< “World-Honored One! What are practices that are not expedient?”
>>> 「善男子！若諸菩薩以波羅蜜多饒益眾生時，但攝財物饒益眾生便為喜足，而不令其出不善處安置善處，如是名為非方便行。何以故？善男子！非於眾生唯作此事名實饒益。譬如糞穢若多若少，終無有能令成香潔。如是眾生由行苦故，其性是苦，無有方便，但以財物暫相饒益，可令成樂，唯有安處妙善法中，方可得名第一饒益。」
<<< “Kulaputra! When benefiting sentient beings by the pāramitās, if bodhisattvas only benefit sentient beings and bring them joy by means of material things, and yet they do not bring about them leaving bad places and becoming peacefully established in good places, this is what is called a practice that is not expedient. How so? Kulaputra! This is not doing something that truly benefits sentient beings. It’s just like manure, whether a lot or a little, you will never be able to turn it into perfume. And so, because sentient beings actions are suffering, their nature is suffering, and it is not expedient to only benefit them with fleeting images of material things. It can cause them to achieve happiness, but only the peaceful place within the subtle, Good Dharma can be called the foremost benefit.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如是一切波羅蜜多有幾清淨？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! How much purity do these pāramitās have?
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！我終不說波羅蜜多，除上五相有餘清淨。然我即依如是諸事總別，當說波羅蜜多清淨之相。
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! I have never said that the pāramitās have any more purity than the five above characteristics. And so, with these as the basis, I will explain the general and specific characteristics of the purity of the pāramitās.”
>>> 「總說一切波羅蜜多清淨相者，當知七種。何等為七？一者、菩薩於此諸法不求他知；二者、於此諸法見已不生執著；三者、即於如是諸法不生疑惑，謂為能得大菩提不？四者、終不自讚毀他有所輕蔑；五者、終不憍傲放逸；六者、終不少有所得便生喜足；七者、終不由此諸法，於他發起嫉妬慳悋。
<<< “Speaking general about the characteristics of the purity of all the pāramitās, you should know, there are seven kinds. What are the seven kinds? 1. Bodhisattvas do not seek the knowledge of others in regard to these Dharmas; 2. Having seen these Dharmas, they do not give rise to attachment; 3. Then they do not give rise to doubt in regard to Dharmas such as these, such as their ability to [bring about] attainment of great awakening, or not; 4. Never praising themselves, slandering others, without the slightest slight; 5. Never arrogant or unruly; 6. Never being satisfied too little or too much with their attainments; and 7. Never being jealous of or stingy with others because of these Dharmas.”              
>>> 「別說一切波羅蜜多清淨相者，亦有七種。何等為七？謂諸菩薩，如我所說七種布施清淨之相，隨順修行。一者、由施物清淨行清淨施；二者、由戒清淨行清淨施；三者、由見清淨行清淨施；四者、由心清淨行清淨施；五者、由語清淨行清淨施；六者、由智清淨行清淨施；七者、由垢清淨行清淨施。是名七種施清淨相。
<<< “Speaking specifically about the characteristics of the purity of all the pāramitās, there are also seven kinds. What are the seven kinds? As I have explained, there are seven kinds of characteristics of the purity of giving of all bodhisattvas, and cultivation of practices in accord with them. 1. Since their giving of things is pure, they practice pure giving; 2. Since their discipline is pure, they practice pure giving; 3. Since their vision is pure, they practice pure giving; 4. Since their minds are pure, they practice pure giving; 5. Since their speech is pure, they practice pure giving; Since their knowledge is pure, they practice pure giving; 7. Since their defilements are pure, they practice pure giving. These are called the characteristics of the seven kinds of purity of giving.”
>>> 「又諸菩薩，能善了知制立律儀一切學處，能善了知出離所犯，具常尸羅，堅固尸羅，常作尸羅，常轉尸羅，受學一切所有學處，是名七種戒清淨相。
<<< “Furthermore, bodhisattvas able to understand well and observe the lessons of the established customs (’Rules), are able to understand and separate themselves from what is sinful, being replete with enduring śīla, steadfast śīla, constant śīla, perpetual śīla, and receive and learn every lesson to be learned. These are called the characteristics of the seven kinds of purity of discipline.”
>>> 「若諸菩薩於自所有業果異熟深生依信，一切所有不饒益事現在前時，不生憤發；亦不反罵、不瞋、不打、不恐、不弄、不以種種不饒益事反相加害；不懷怨結；若諫誨時不令恚惱；亦復不待他來諫誨；不由恐怖有染愛心而行忍辱；不以作恩而便放捨，是名七種忍清淨相。
<<< “If bodhisattvas have deep faith toward their own dominant karmic fruitions (adhipatiphala) and are not upset by whatever unfavorable situation comes before them; Are not abusive, not angry, not violent, not fearful, not showy, not in any way malicious toward any kind of unfavorable situation;  do not harbor anger; Are not caused anguish when being corrected; Also do not wait for others to come correct them; Do not practice patience (kṣānti) due to a fearful or emotionally afflicted mind; and they are not kind out of pity. These are called the characteristics of the seven kinds of purity of patience.”
>>> 「若諸菩薩，通達精進平等之性；不由勇猛勤精進故自舉陵他；具大勢力；具大精進；有所堪能；堅固勇猛；於諸善法終不捨軛，如是名為七種精進清淨之相。
<<< “If bodhisattvas have penetrated the equal nature of determination (vīrya); Do not honor themselves or denigrate others due to their bold, courageous vigor; Are replete with great power; Are replete with great determination; Have the foremost ability; Are steadfastly courageous; Never cast off the yoke of the Good Dharma. These are called the characteristics of the seven kinds of purity of determination.”
>>> 「若諸菩薩，有善通達相三摩地靜慮；有圓滿三摩地靜慮；有俱分三摩地靜慮；有運轉三摩地靜慮；有無所依三摩地靜慮；有善修治三摩地靜慮；有於菩薩藏聞緣修習無量三摩地靜慮，如是名為七種靜慮清淨之相。
<<< ‘If bodhisattvas have samādhi *dhyāna* that well penetrates characteristics; Have perfect samādhi dhyāna; Have complete samādhi dhyāna; Have progressive samādhi dhyāna; Have samādhi dhyāna that does not reply upon anything; Have well-cultivated and controlled samādhi dhyāna; and the immeasurable samādhi dhyāna of practicing the lessons learned from the Bodhisattva Treasury. These are called the characteristics of the seven kinds of purity of dhyāna.”
>>> 「若諸菩薩，遠離增益、損減二邊行於中道，是名為慧；由此慧故，如實了知解脫門義，謂空、無願、無相三解脫門；如實了知有自性義，謂遍計所執、若依他起、若圓成實三種自性；如實了知無自性義，謂相、生、勝義三種無自性性；如實了知世俗諦義，謂於五明處；如實了知勝義諦義，謂於七真如；又無分別離諸戲論純一理趣多所住故，無量總法為所緣故，及毘鉢舍那故；能善成辦法隨法行，是名七種慧清淨相。」
<<< “If bodhisattvas are far removed from the two extremes of improvement or diminishment in their  practice of the Middle Way, this is what is known as wisdom (prajñā); Due to this wisdom, they truly understand the meaning of the doors of liberation, which are the three doors of liberation: emptiness, aimlessness, and characteristiclessness; They truly understand the meaning of having inherent nature, which are the three kinds of inherent nature: totally imagined, (parikalpita), arising in dependence upon another (paratantra), and the completely perfect (pariniṣpanna); They truly understand the meaning of being without inherent nature, which are the three kinds of natures that are without inherent nature: characteristics, arising, and ultimate meaning; They truly understand worldly, conventional meaning, where are the five places of illumination (’learning’ - literature, craftsmanship, medicine, logic, and doctrine); They truly understand the true meaning of ultimate meaning, which are the Seven Suchnesses; Furthermore, due to being free from all discursiveness (prapañca), without discrimination, abiding for long periods in the pure, unitary principle, due to objectifying the immeasurable, unified Dharma, and due to their vipaśyanā, they are well able to carry out the practice of the Dharma in accord with the Dharma. These are called the characteristics of the seven kinds of purity of wisdom.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如是五相各有何業？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! What karma does each of the five characteristics have?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！當知彼相有五種業，謂諸菩薩無染著故，於現法中於所修習波羅蜜多，恒常殷重勤修加行無有放逸。無顧戀故，攝受當來不放逸因。無罪過故，能正修習極善圓滿、極善清淨極善鮮白波羅蜜多。無分別故，方便善巧波羅蜜多，速得圓滿。正迴向故，一切生處波羅蜜多及彼可愛諸果異熟，皆得無盡，乃至無上正等菩提。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! You should know those five characteristics have five kinds of karma, which are: because bodhisattvas are unattached, in their cultivation of the pāramitās amidst manifest dharmas they ever abundantly increase their practice without laxity. Because they are disinterested, they embrace the causes of not be lax in the future. Because they are irreproachable, they are able to correctly cultivate the most well perfected, most well purified, most well rarefied pāramitā. Because they are nondiscriminatory, their expedient skillfullness in the pāramitās quickly attains fulfillment. Because they correctly transfer [merit], wherever they may be, the pāramitās and their pleasant fruits will all be inexhaustible, up to their unsurpassable, correct awakening (anuttarā-saṃyak-saṃbodhi).”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如是所說波羅蜜多，何者最廣大？何者無染污？何者最明盛？何者不可動？何者最清淨？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! As you have explained the pāramitās thus, what is it that is most expansive? What is it that is without defilement? What is it that is most radiant? What is it that is immovable? What is it that is most purified?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！無染著性、無顧戀性、正迴向性，最為廣大。無罪過性、無分別性，無有染污。思擇所作，最為明盛。已入無退轉法地者，名不可動。若十地攝、佛地攝者，名最清淨。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! The nature of being without defiling attachment, the nature of disinterest, and the nature of correct transference [of merit] are what are most expansive. The nature of being irreproachable and the nature of being nondiscriminatory are what are without defilement. Thoughtful action is what is most radiant. One who has entered the stage of a non-regressing Dharma turning is called immovable. If the Ten Stages have been embraced, and one has embraced the stage of Buddha[hood], this is called most purified.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！何因緣故，菩薩所得波羅蜜多諸可愛果及諸異熟常無有盡？波羅蜜多亦無有盡？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Why are the pleasant fruits and developments of the pāramitās that bodhisattvas attain eternal and inexhaustible? Are the pāramitās also inexhaustible?"
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！展轉相依生起修習無間斷故。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! Because of the uninterrupted cultivation of severance [from] the dependent arising of the characteristics of expansion and revolution.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！何因緣故，是諸菩薩深信愛樂波羅蜜多，非於如是波羅蜜多所得可愛諸果異熟？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Why do bodhisattvas have profound faith and joyful fondness for the pāramitās, and not for the pleasant fruits and developments of these pāramitās?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！五因緣故：一者、波羅蜜多是最增上喜樂因故；二者、波羅蜜多是其究竟饒益一切自他因故；三者、波羅蜜多是當來世彼可愛果異熟因故；四者、波羅蜜多非諸雜染所依事故；五者、波羅蜜多非是畢竟變壞法故。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! There are five reasons: 1. The pāramitās are the cause of supreme joy and bliss. 2. The pāramitās are the cause of ultimate benefit for everyone, oneself and others included. 3. The pāramitās are the cause of pleasant rewards in the future. 4. The pāramitās are not a basis for defilement. 5. The pāramitās are not things that ultimately change and perish."
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！一切波羅蜜多，各有幾種最勝威德？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! How many kinds of august qualities does each of the pāramitās have?"
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！當知一切波羅蜜多，各有四種最勝威德：一者、於此波羅蜜多正修行時，能捨慳悋、犯戒、心憤、懈怠、散亂、見趣所治；二者、於此正修行時，能為無上正等菩提、真實資糧；三者、於此正修行時，於現法中能自攝受饒益有情；四者、於此正修行時，於未來世能得廣大無盡可愛諸果異熟。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! You should know, each of the pāramitās has four kinds of august qualities: 1. When cultivating these pāramitās correctly, one is able to relinquish stinginess, transgression, exasperation, idleness, distractedness, and views, their opposites; 2. When cultivating them correctly, one is able to [accumulate] the true supplies for
unexcelled, supreme awakening; 3. When cultivating them correctly, even in the present world, one is able to embrace within oneself benefit for sentient beings; 4. When cultivating them correctly, one is able to attain expansive, inexhaustible favorable results from their maturation in the future. ”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如是一切波羅蜜多，何因？何果？有何義利？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! What is the cause of each of the pāramitās? What are the results (’fruit’)? What benefit do they have?”  
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！如是一切波羅蜜多，大悲為因；微妙可愛諸果異熟，饒益一切有情為果；圓滿無上廣大菩提為大義利。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! Each of these pāramitās has great compassion as its cause.; The maturing of their subtle, wonderous favorable results benefit all sentient beings is the result; and the fulfillment of supreme, expansive awakening is their great benefit.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩白佛言：「世尊！若諸菩薩具足一切無盡財寶成就大悲，何緣世間現有眾生貧窮可得？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! If bodhisattvas are endowed with inexhaustible riches and they achieve Great Compassion, why is there still poverty to be found among people in the world?"
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！是諸眾生自業過失！若不爾者，菩薩常懷饒益他心，又常具足無盡財寶，若諸眾生無自惡業能為障礙，何有世間貧窮可得？譬如餓鬼為大熱渴逼迫其身，見大海水悉皆涸竭；非大海過，是諸餓鬼自業過耳。如是菩薩所施財寶猶如大海無有過失，是諸眾生自業過耳，猶如餓鬼自惡業力令無有果。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! That is the error of all sentient being’s own karma! If it were not so, bodhisattvas could always cherish the mind to benefit others and always be endowed with inexhaustible riches, but if it were not for the obstacles created by sentient beings’ own evil karma, how could poverty be found in the world? Just like hungry ghosts, their bodies oppressed by great heat and thirst, watching the water of a great sea evaporate; it is not the sea’s fault. It is the fault of those hungry ghosts own karma! Like this, the riches given by the bodhisattva, like the great sea, have no fault, it is the fault of sentient being’s own karma! Just like the power of hungry ghosts’ own evil karma cause them to be without results.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！菩薩以何等波羅蜜多，取一切法無自性性？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! By which pāramitā do bodhisattvas apprehend the inherent nature-less nature of all dharmas?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！以般若波羅蜜多能取諸法無自性性。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! It is by Prajñāpāramitā that the inherent nature-less nature of all dharmas is apprehened.”
>>> 「世尊！若般若波羅蜜多能取諸法無自性性，何故不取有自性性？」
<<< “World-Honored One! If Prajñāpāramitā is able to apprehend the inherent nature-less nature of all dharmas, why does it not apprehend the nature of having an inherent nature?”
>>> 「善男子！我終不說以無自性性取無自性性。然無自性性，離諸文字自內所證；不可捨於言說文字而能宣說。是故我說般若波羅蜜多能取諸法無自性性。」
<<< “Kulaputra! I have never said that the inherent nature-less nature of all dharmas is apprehended by inherently nature-less nature. Although the nature of lacking inherent nature is beyond all words and letters, something internally self-realized, yet it cannot be explained it in speech by rejecting words and letters. For this reason, I have said Prajñāpāramitā is able to apprehend the inherent nature-less nature of all dharmas.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如佛所說波羅蜜多，近波羅蜜多，大波羅蜜多。云何波羅蜜多？云何近波羅蜜多？云何大波羅蜜多？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! As the Buddha explains pāramitā (’crossing over’), nearing pāramitā, the great pāramitā. What is pāramitā? What is nearing pāramitā? What is great pāramitā?” *  
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！若諸菩薩經無量時修行施等成就善法，而諸煩惱猶故現行，未能制伏然為彼伏，謂於勝解行地軟中勝解轉時，是名波羅蜜多。復於無量時修行施等，漸復增上，成就善法，而諸煩惱猶故現行，然能制伏非彼所伏，謂從初地已上，是名近波羅蜜多。復於無量時修行布施等，轉復增上，成就善法，一切煩惱皆不現行，謂從八地已上，是名大波羅蜜多。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! If bodhisattvas spend immeasurable amounts of time cultivating the practice of giving, etc., achieving good dharmas, yet habits of affliction still appear, and rather than being able to control them, they are controlled by them. This ‘turning of liberation’ when resting within the stage of liberating practice is called pāramitā. Through further immeasurable amounts of time they cultivate the practice of giving, etc., progressing further and increasing their achievement of good dharmas, yet habits of affliction still appear, but they are able to control them, and are not controlled by them. From the initial stage and above, this is called nearing pāramitā. Through further immeasurable amounts of time they cultivate the practice of giving, etc., progressing further and increasing their achievement of good dharmas, and all habits of affliction do not appear. From the eighth stage and above, this is called the great pāramitā.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！此諸地中煩惱隨眠可有幾種？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Among  these stages, how many kinds of afflicted torpor are to be found ?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！略有三種：一者、害伴隨眠，謂於前五地。何以故？善男子！諸不俱生現行煩惱，是俱生煩惱現行助伴，彼於爾時永無復有，是故說名害伴隨眠；二者、羸劣隨眠，謂於第六、第七地中微細現行，若修所伏不現行故；三者、微細隨眠，謂於第八地已上，從此已去，一切煩惱不復現行，唯有所知障為依止故。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! In general, there are three: 1. Torpor that harms companions, which is found in the first five stages. How so? Kulaputra! All the afflictions that do not arise together with activity (’the appearance of saṃskāra’) **are the companions of the afflictions that do arise together with activity, for this reason it is said that there is torpor that harms companions; 2. Emaciating torpor, which is subtly practiced during the sixth and seventh stages, because if one cultivates control, activity does not appear; 3. Subtle torpor, which is from the eighth stage and above, from here on out all afflictions are no longer active because they only rest upon the obstacle to the knowable.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！此諸隨眠，幾種麁重斷所顯示？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! By cutting off how many kinds of ‘coarse heavinesses’ are these torpors revealed?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！但由二種：謂由在皮麁重斷故，顯彼初二，復由在膚麁重斷故，顯彼第三。若在於骨麁重斷者，我說永離一切隨眠，位在佛地。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! There are just two kinds: Since  the ‘coarse heaviness’ of the skin (’the superficial’) is cut off, the first two [torpors] are revealed, and since the ‘coarse heaviness’ of the flesh is cut off, the third is revealed. If one cuts off the ‘coarse heaviness’ of the bones, I say that one has forever left all torpor and is established in the stage of Buddha[hood]."
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！經幾不可數劫能斷如是麁重？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Throughout how many incalculable kalpas [does it take] to be able to cut off ‘coarse heaviness’ like this?”
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！經於三大不可數劫、或無量劫，所謂年、月、半月、晝夜、一時、半時、須臾、瞬息、剎那量劫不可數故。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! Throughout three great, incalculable kalpas, or immeasurable kalpas, because they consist of immeasurable kalpas of years, months, half-months, days and nights, moments, half moments, kṣaṇas, and thought moments.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！是諸菩薩於諸地中所生煩惱，當知何相？何失？何德？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Afflictions that arise in these bodhisattvas in the stages, what are characteristics should be known? What faults? What merits?"
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！無染污相。何以故？是諸菩薩於初地中，定於一切諸法法界已善通達，由此因緣，菩薩要知方起煩惱非為不知，是故說名無染污相。於自身中不能生苦，故無過失。菩薩生起如是煩惱，於有情界能斷苦因，是故彼有無量功德。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! Undefiled characteristics. Why? Bodhisattvas in the first stage, having already assuredly well penetrated the Dharma Realm of all dharmas, from these causes and conditions, afflictions arise with the full knowing of those bodhisattvas and not from unknowing, for this reason they are called undefiled characteristics. They are not able to bring about suffering toward [being] within their own body, and are therefore faultless. Bodhisattvas, giving rise to afflictions such as these, are able to cut off the causes of suffering in the realm of sentient beings and therefore have immeasurable merit.”
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「甚奇！世尊！無上菩提乃有如是大功德利，令諸菩薩生起煩惱，尚勝一切有情、聲聞、獨覺善根，何況其餘無量功德？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “Most rare! World-Honored One! The great merit and benefit of supreme awakening, causing all bodhisattvas to give rise to affliction, yet surpassing the good roots of all sentient beings, voice-hearers, and the solitary awakened, to say nothing of their remaining immeasurable merit."
>>> 觀自在菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如世尊說：『若聲聞乘、若復大乘，唯是一乘。』此何密意？」
<<< Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! As the World-Honored One has said, ‘Whether the Voice-Hearer Vehicle or the Great Vehicle, there is only one vehicle.’ What is the secret meaning to this?
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！如我於彼聲聞乘中，宣說種種諸法自性，所謂五蘊、或內六處、或外六處，如是等類；於大乘中，即說彼法同一法界、同一理趣，故我不說乘差別性。於中或有如言於義妄起分別，一類增益，一類損減。又於諸乘差別道理，謂互相違，如是展轉遞興諍論。如是名為此中密意。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! Within that vehicle for voice-hearers I have proclaimed the inherent nature of all the various dharmas, such as the five aggregates, the six internal bases, the six external bases, and these kinds of things. Within the Great Vehicle it is then explained that those dharmas are identical to the Dharmadhatu, are identical to the same principle, therefore I do not say that the vehicles have a differentiated nature. From this there may be those who have a mistaken notion, taking the meaning of these words literally, differentiating one kind as better, and one kind as worse, or further, differentiating the vehicles as being logical or contradictory, and thus turning in argumentation among themselves. That is the secret meaning to this.”
>>> 爾時，世尊欲重宣此義，而說頌曰：
<<< At that time the World-Honored One, wanting to emphasize the meaning of this, spoke in verse saying:
>>> 諸地攝想所對治，　　
殊勝生願及諸學，　
由依佛說是大乘，　　
於此善修成大覺。
<<< The stages, gathered perceptions, and what is counteracted,
The preeminent giving rise to vows, and all that is studied,
Being dependent upon the words of the Buddha, this is the Great Vehicle,
Cultivating this well, one achieves the great awakening.
>>> 宣說諸法種種性，　　
復說皆同一理趣，
謂於下乘或上乘，　　
故我說乘無異性。
<<< It is said that dharmas have all kinds of natures,
And further said that they are all identical to the same principle,
Which then becomes an inferior vehicle and a superior vehicle,
Therefore I have said that the vehicle is without a differentiated nature.
>>> 如言於義妄分別，　　
或有增益或損減，　
謂此二種互相違，　　
愚癡意解成乖諍。」
<<< To differentiate mistakenly, taking the meaning of these words literally,
There being a ‘better’ or a ‘worse’,
Which then becomes two kinds being opposed to each other,
[This is] ignorant understanding that leads to argument.
>>> 爾時，觀自在菩薩摩訶薩復白佛言：「世尊！於是解深密法門中，此名何教？我當云何奉持？」
<<< At that time, Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva mahasattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Within this Dharma Door that reveals the profound secret, what is this teaching called? How should I respectfully remember it?
>>> 佛告觀自在菩薩曰：「善男子！此名諸地波羅蜜多了義之教，於此諸地波羅蜜多了義之教，汝當奉持！」
<<< The Buddha replied to Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! It is called the explicit teaching on the stages [and] pāramitās, and by explicit teaching on the stages [and] pāramitās you should respectfully remember it!”
>>> 說此諸地波羅蜜多了義教時，於大會中有七十五千菩薩，皆得菩薩大乘光明三摩地。
<<< When this explicit teaching on the stages [and] pāramitās [was taught], seventy-five thousand bodhisattvas among the great assembly completely attained the bodhisattva’s Light of the Mahayana samadhi.

>>> 如來成所作事
<<< Chapter 8 - The Accomplishments of the ‘doings’ of the Tathagata
>>> 如來成所作事品第八

爾時，曼殊室利菩薩摩訶薩請問佛言：「世尊！如佛所說如來法身，如來法身有何等相？」
<<< At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva mahasattva inquired of the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! As the Buddha has explained the Dharma Body of the Thus Come One, what are the characteristics of the the Dharma Body of the Thus Come One?”
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！若於諸地波羅蜜多，善修出離，轉依成滿，是名如來法身之相。當知此相，二因緣故不可思議：無戲論故，無所為故。而諸眾生計著戲論，有所為故。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! Being well cultivated in the transcendence of the stages and pāramitās, [and] completely converting (’transforming’) the reliance (’base’), these are called the characteristics of the the Dharma Body of the Thus Come One. You should know, these characteristics are inconceivable for two reasons: Because they are without elaboration (prapañca), and because they are unconditioned.  Yet, sentient beings all imagine and cling to elaborations about the conditioned.”
>>> 「世尊！聲聞、獨覺所得轉依，名法身不？」
<<< World-Honored One! Is the conversion of the base of voice-hearers and solitary awakened ones called the Dharma Body, or not?”
>>> 「善男子！不名法身。」
<<< “Kulaputra! It is not called the Dharma Body.”
>>> 「世尊！當名何身？」
<<< “World-Honored One! What should that body be called?”
>>> 「善男子！名解脫身。由解脫身故，說一切聲聞、獨覺與諸如來平等平等；由法身故，說有差別。如來法身有差別故，無量功德最勝差別，算數譬喻所不能及。」
<<< “Kulaputra! It is called the Liberation Body. It is in regard to the Liberation Body that it is said that voice-hearers, solitary awakened ones, and all Thus Come Ones are equal. It is in regard to the Dharma Body that it is said that there is a difference [between them]. Because there is a difference between the Dharma Body of the Thus Come One, a difference of immeasurable superior merit unable to be calculated or compared.”
>>> 曼殊室利菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！我當云何應知如來生起之相？」
<<< Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! How should I understand the characteristics of the arising of the Thus Come One?”
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！一切如來化身作業，如世界起一切種類；如來功德眾所莊嚴，住持為相。當知化身相有生起，法身之相無有生起。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! The karma performed by the transformational bodies of every Thus Come One are like the arisings of all the kinds and types of things in the world; characterized by the sustainment of the adornments of the accumulated merit of the Thus Come One. You should know, the characteristics of transformational bodies have arising. Characteristics of the Dharma Body are without arising.”
>>> 曼殊室利菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！云何應知示現化身方便善巧？」
<<< Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! How should one understand the appearance of the skillful upāya of transformational bodies?”
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！遍於一切三千大千佛國土中，或眾推許增上王家，或眾推許大福田家，同時入胎、誕生、長大、受欲、出家、示行苦行、捨苦行已成等正覺，次第示現。是名如來示現化身方便善巧。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! Throughout all the three thousand great thousand Buddha Lands, in honorable and royal households, or in honorable and wealthy households, at that time there is entering the womb, birth, growing up, experiencing desire, leaving home, performing austerities and, relinquishing the practice of austerities, achieving supreme correct awakening, manifesting each one at a time. This is called the appearance of the skillful upāya of transformational bodies of the Thus Come One.”
>>> 曼殊室利菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！凡有幾種，一切如來身所住持言音差別？由此言音所化有情，未成熟者令其成熟，已成熟者緣此為境速得解脫？」
<<< Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! How many kinds of voices are sustained by each body of the Thus Come Ones? By which these voices transform sentient beings, causing those not yet matured to become mature, and those already matured to quickly attain liberation?
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！如來言音略有三種：一者、契經；二者、調伏；三者、本母。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! In general, there are three kinds of voices of the Thus Come One: 1. Sutras, 2. Discipline, and 3. The ‘originating mothers’ (i.e. mātṛkā).”
>>> 「世尊！云何契經？云何調伏？云何本母？」
<<< “World-Honored One! What are the sutras? What is the Discipline? What are the originating mothers?”

Sutra
>>> 「曼殊室利！若於是處，我依攝事顯示諸法，是名契經。謂依四事，或依九事，或復依於二十九事。
<<< “Mañjuśrī! If, in regard to these foundations, I rely upon means of unification (saṃgraha-vastu) to demonstrate the Dharma, this is called a sutra. This may depend upon four means (’doings’), or upon nine means, or again it may depend upon twenty-nine things. “
>>> 「云何四事？一者、聽聞事；二者、歸趣事；三者、修學事；四者、菩提事。
<<< What are the four means? 1. Learning; 2. Refuge (’surrender’); 3. Study; and 4. Bodhi.”
>>> 「云何九事？一者、施設有情事；二者、彼所受用事；三者、彼生起事；四者、彼生已住事；五者、彼染淨事；六者、彼差別事；七者、能宣說事；八者、所宣說事；九者、諸眾會事。
<<< What are the nine means? 1. Establishing sentient beings; 2. Their experiences; 3. Their birth; 4. Their abiding after birth; 5. Their purification; 6. Their differences; 7. Their ability to be taught; 8. What is taught; and 9. The assemblies.”
>>> 「云何名為二十九事？謂依雜染品有：攝諸行事，彼次第隨轉事，即於是中作補特伽羅想已，於當來世流轉因事，作是想已，於當來世流轉因事。依清淨品有：繫念於所緣事，即於是中勤精進事，心安住事，現法樂住事，超一切苦緣方便事，彼遍知事。此復三種：顛倒遍知所依處故，依有情想外有情中邪行遍知所依處故，內離增上慢遍知所依處故。修依處事，作證事，修習事，令彼堅固事，彼行相事，彼所緣事，已斷未斷觀察善巧事，彼散亂事，彼不散亂事，不散亂依處事，不棄修習劬勞加行事，修習勝利事，彼堅牢事，攝聖行事，攝聖行眷屬事，通達真實事，證得涅槃事，於善說法毘奈耶中世間正見超昇一切外道所得正見頂事，及即於此不修退事，於善說法毘奈耶中不修習故，說名為退，非見過失，故名為退。
<<< What are the twenty-nine means? These are [first], things which depend upon defilement: The gathering [together] of all habits/conditioning (saṁskāra), their subsequent turning, which then, within this, since there is the perception of a pudgala (’self’), there is the continued turning in the future, and, having had this perception, there is the continued turning in the future. [Then] there are things which depend upon purification: Binding mindfulness to the object [of meditation], diligent virya therein, the mind peacefully abiding, abiding in the presence of Dharma joy, the upaya of transcending all states of suffering, and pervasive knowledge of these. This has three further kinds: The pervasive knowledge of the basis of inversion, the pervasive knowledge of the basis of heretical practices among outsiders that depend upon the perception of sentient beings, and the pervasive knowledge of the basis of the absence of pride among insiders (i.e. the orthodox). [Then there is] cultivation [of meditation] based on the foundations, realization, and practice, which causes one to be steadfast, the activities [of meditation], the objects [of meditation], skillfulness in knowing what has already been abandoned and what has yet to be abandoned, distractions [to meditation], the basis for not being distracted, persevering (increased effort, prayoga) in cultivation, the benefits [of meditation], its steadfastness, the embracing of sagely practice, embracing the aids to sagely practice, penetrating reality, the realization of Nirvana, the correct view held by those of the world regarding the well-explained Dharma surpasses the correct view of outsiders, and the regression that comes from not cultivating, and because of not practicing insight into the well-explained Dharma it is called regressing. It is not called regressing because of mistaken views.”

Vinaya
>>> 「曼殊室利！若於是處，我依聲聞及諸菩薩，顯示別解脫及別解脫相應之法，是名調伏。」
<<< Mañjuśrī! If, in regard to these foundations, I rely upon the Dharma(s) of liberation (別解脫 - prātimokṣa) and the characteristics of those Dharmas that I have revealed to voice-hearers and bodhisattvas, this is called Discipline.
>>> 「世尊！菩薩別解脫，幾相所攝？」
<<< “World-Honored One! How many aspects are there to the bodhisattva-prātimokṣa?”
>>> 「善男子！當知七相：一者、宣說受軌則事故；二者、宣說隨順他勝事故；三者、宣說隨順毀犯事故；四者、宣說有犯自性故；五者、宣說無犯自性故；六者、宣說出所犯故；七者、宣說捨律儀故。
<<< “Kulaputra! You should know there are seven aspects: 1. Instruction on things pertaining to receiving the (or, the received) rules; 2. Instruction on things pertaining to being in accord with them; 3. Instruction on things pertaining to being in accord with transgression; 4. Instruction on things pertaining to the nature of transgression; 5. Instruction on things pertaining to the nature of not transgressing; 6. Instruction on things pertaining to how to depart from transgression; and 7. Instruction on the relinquishment of proper conduct.”

Mātṛkā - Eleven Characteristics
>>> 「曼殊室利！若於是處，我以十一種相決了分別顯示諸法，是名本母。何等名為十一種相？一者、世俗相；二者、勝義相；三者、菩提分法所緣相；四者、行相；五者、自性相；六者、彼果相；七者、彼領受開示相；八者、彼障礙法相；九者、彼隨順法相；十者、彼過患相；十一者、彼勝利相。
<<< Mañjuśrī! If, in regard to these foundations, I define, analyze, and demonstrate things in terms of eleven kinds of characteristics, these are called the originating mothers (mātṛkā). What are these eleven kinds of characteristics? 1. Characteristics of worldly conventions; 2. Characteristics of ultimate meaning; 3. Characteristics of the objects that are aids to awakening; 4. Characteristics of practice [of the aids to awakening]; 5. Characteristics of inherent nature [of the aids to awakening]; 6. Characteristics of [karmic] results [of the aids to awakening]; 7. Characteristics of the explanations [of the aids to awakening]; 8. Characteristics of things that obstruct [the aids to awakening]; 9. Characteristics of things in accord [with the aids to awakening]; 10. Characteristics of things harmful [to the aids to awakening]; and 11. Characteristics that benefit [the aids to awakening].”

Characteristics 1 - 3
>>> 「世俗相者，當知三種：一者、宣說補特伽羅故；二者、宣說遍計所執自性故；三者、宣說諸法作用事業故。勝義相者，當知宣說七種真如故。菩提分法所緣相者，當知宣說遍一切種所知事故。
<<< “Characteristics of worldly conventions, you should know, are of three kinds: 1. Instruction about pudgalas; 2. Instruction about clinging to totally imaginary inherent natures; 3. Instruction about the karma of the using and doing of all dharmas. The Characteristic of the Ultimate Meaning, you should know, is explained (instructed) by the Seven Suchnesses. The characteristics of the objects of the aids to awakening, you should know, pervade knowledge of the doing of all kinds of things.”

Characteristic 4 - Eight practices of insight
>>> 「行相者，當知宣說八行觀故。云何名為八行觀耶？一者、諦實故；二者、安住故；三者、過失故；四者、功德故；五者、理趣故；六者、流轉故；七者、道理故；八者、總別故。
<<< “Characteristics of practice, you should know, are explained by the eight practices of insight. What are called the eight practices of insight? 1. Truth; 2. Propositions; 3. Errors; 4. Merit; 5. Principles; 6. Turning (saṃsāra); 7. Reason; 8. Unity and difference.”

Characteristic 4.1
>>> 「諦實者，謂諸法真如。
<<< “Truth refers to the suchness of all dharmas.”

Characteristic 4.2 - 4.3
>>> 「安住者，謂或安立補特伽羅，或復安立諸法遍計所執自性，或復安立一向、分別、反問、置記，或復安立隱密、顯了、記別、差別。過失者，謂我宣說諸雜染法，有無量門差別過患。
<<< “Propositions refer to proposing a pudgala, or proposing the inherent nature of the totally imagined that is clung to, or propositions that are one-sided, contrary, or silent, or propositions that are secret, revealed, predicted, or differentiated. Errors refer to what I have explained as all defiling dharmas in immeasurable different teachings on error.”

Characteristic 4.5
>>> 「功德者，謂我宣說諸清淨法，有無量門差別勝利。
<<< “Merit refers to what I have explained as pure dharmas in immeasurable different teachings on what is advantageous.”

Characteristic 4.6 - Six kinds of Principles
>>> 「理趣者，當知六種：一者、真義理趣；二者、證得理趣；三者、教導理趣；四者、遠離二邊理趣；五者、不可思議理趣；六者、意趣理趣。
<<< Principles you should know, are of six kinds: 1. The principle of meaning of Truth; 2. The principle of realization; 3. The principle of guidance; 4. The principle of transcending the two extremes; 5. The principle of inconceivability; and 6. The principle of intention.”

Characteristic 4.6
>>> 「流轉者，所謂三世三有為相，及四種緣。
<<< “Saṃsāra refers to the three times, the three characteristics of the conditioned [arising, abiding, and ceasing], and the four kinds of causes [direct, antecedent, objective, and dominant].”

Characteristic 4.7 - Four kinds of logical reasoning
>>> 「道理者，當知四種：一者、觀待道理；二者、作用道理；三者、證成道理；四者、法爾道理。觀待道理者，謂若因若緣，能生諸行，及起隨說，如是名為觀待道理。作用道理者，謂若因若緣，能得諸法，或能成辦，或復生已作諸業用，如是名為作用道理。證成道理者，謂若因若緣，能令所立、所說、所標、義得成立，令正覺悟，如是名為證成道理。
<<< Logical reasoning, you should know, is of four kinds: 1. Logical reasoning from observation; 2. Logical reasoning from function; 3. Logical reasoning from realization; and 4. Logical reasoning according to natural law. Logical reasoning from observation refers to causes and conditions that are able to give rise to all conditioned behaviors (saṃskāra) and their subsequent [verbal] descriptions. This is called logical reasoning from observation. Logical reasoning from function refers to causes and conditions which are able to attain all Dharmas, or able to bring them to completion, or that, once arisen, put them into action. This is called logical reasoning from function. Logical reasoning from realization refers to causes and conditions that are able to cause establishment, explanation, indication, and understanding of the meaning, which [in turn] cause correct awakening. This is called logical reasoning from realization.”
>>> 「又此道理略有二種：一者、清淨；二者不清淨。由五種相名為清淨，由七種相名不清淨。
<<< “Moreover, this logical reasoning [from realization] , generally speaking, is of two kinds: 1. Pure; and 2. Not pure. There are five aspects to what is called pure, and there are seven aspects of what is called not pure.”

Characteristic 4.7.3.1 - Five pure aspects of logical reasoning from realization
>>> 「云何由五種相名為清淨？一者、現見所得相；二者、依止現見所得相；三者、自類譬喻所引相；四者、圓成實相；五者、善清淨言教相。
<<< “What are the five aspects [of logical reasoning from realization] that are called pure? 1. The aspects of directly seeing; 2. Aspects based upon directly seeing; 3. Aspects drawn from analogy; 4. Aspects [which are] completely true; and 5. Aspects of well purified teaching.”
>>> 「現見所得相者，謂一切行皆無常性，一切行皆是苦性，一切法皆無我性，此為世間現量所得。如是等類，是名現見所得相。
<<< “Aspects of directly seeing refer to the impermanent nature of all conditioned behavior (saṃskāra), the suffering nature of all conditioned behavior, the selfless nature of all conditioned behavior. These are directly experienced in the world. Things like this are what are called aspects of directly seeing.”
>>> 「依止現見所得相者，謂一切行皆剎那性，他世有性，淨不淨業無失壞性。由彼能依麁無常性，現可得故。由諸有情種種差別，依種種業現可得故，由諸有情若樂若苦，淨不淨業以為依止，現可得故。由此因緣，於不現見可為比度。如是等類，是名依止現見所得相。
<<< “Aspects based upon directly seeing refer to the totally momentary (kṣaṇa) nature of all conditioned behavior, the nature of other worlds, and the nature of pure and impure karma not disappearing. Since these are based upon the coarse nature of impermanence, they are directly perceived. Since the various differences among sentient beings depend upon
their various karmic actions, they are directly perceived, and since the suffering or the
joy of sentient beings is based upon their pure or impure karmic actions, they are directly perceived. Things like this are called aspects based upon directly seeing.”
>>> 「自類譬喻所引相者，謂於內外諸行聚中，引諸世間共所了知所得生死以為譬喻，引諸世間共所了知所得生等種種苦相以為譬喻，引諸世間共所了知所得不自在相以為譬喻，又復於外引諸世間共所了知所得衰盛以為譬喻。如是等類，當知是名自類譬喻所引相。
<<< Aspects drawn from analogy refers to drawing upon things commonly known in the world as analogies, like birth and death among the assemblages of inner and outer conditioned bindings, drawing upon things commonly known in the world as analogies, like the suffering of birth, etc., drawing upon things commonly known in the world as analogies, like not being sovereignly free, and also drawing upon commonly known examples in the world as analogies, such as the idea of wealth. Thing like this are called aspects drawn from analogy.”
>>> 「圓成實相者，謂即如是現見所得相，若依止現見所得相，若自類譬喻所得相，於所成立，決定能成，當知是名圓成實相。
<<< Aspects [which are] completely true refer to the ability to definitively achieve what has been established either through the aspects of directly seeing, through the aspects of what are based upon directly seeing, or throughout aspects drawn from analogy. You should know, this is called aspects [which are] completely true.”
>>> 「善清淨言教相者，謂一切智者之所宣說，如言涅槃究竟寂靜，如是等類，當知是名善清淨言教相。
<<< “Aspects of well purified teaching refers to what is said by all-knowing ones, such as that Nirvana is ultimate quiescence. This like this, you should know, are called aspects of well purified teaching.”
>>> 「善男子！是故由此五種相故，名善觀察清淨道理，由清淨故，應可修習。」
<<< “Kulaputra! It is because of these five aspects, called pure logical reasoning good insight, and because they are pure they should be cultivated.”
>>> 曼殊室利菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！一切智相者，當知有幾種？」
<<< Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! How many kinds of characteristics are there of an all-knowing one?”
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！略有五種：一者、若有出現世間一切智聲，無不普聞；二者、成就三十二種大丈夫相；三者、具足十力，能斷一切眾生一切疑惑；四者、具足四無所畏宣說正法，不為一切他論所伏，而能摧伏一切邪論；五者、於善說法、毘奈耶中，八支聖道、四沙門等，皆現可得。如是生故，相故，斷疑網故，非他所伏能伏他故，聖道、沙門現可得故，如是五種，當知名為一切智相。
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! In general, there are five kinds: 1. If the voice of an all-knowing one arises in the world, there is nowhere it will not be heard; 2. They achieve the thirty-two characteristics of a great person; 3. Being replete with the Ten Powers, they are able to cut off all the doubts of all sentient beings; 4. Being replete with the Four Fearlessnesses in their teaching of the Correct Dharma, irrefutable by the arguments of other, able to refute all false arguments; and 5. Being able to completely bring about the well spoken Dharma, the Vinaya, the Noble Eightfold Path, and the the four śramaṇas. Due to arising like this, due to these characteristics, due to cutting away the net of doubt, not being subject to refutation by others, but rather able to refute others, the Noble Path and śramaṇas appear. These five, you should know, are called characteristics of an all-knowing one.”
>>> 「善男子！如是證成道理，由現量故、由比量故、由聖教量故。由五種相，名為清淨。
<<< “Kulaputra! Logical reasoning from realization like this, being directly experienced, being inferred, being wisely taught, these five kinds of characteristics are called pure.”

Characteristic 4.7.3.2 - Seven impure aspects of logical reasoning from realization
>>> 「云何由七種相名不清淨？一者、此餘同類可得相；二者、此餘異類可得相；三者、一切同類可得相；四者、一切異類可得相；五者、異類譬喻所得相；六者、非圓成實相；七者、非善清淨言教相。
<<< “What are the seven kinds of characteristics that are called not pure” 1. Characteristics ascertained by similitude; 2. Characteristics ascertained by difference; 3. Characteristics ascertained by similitude to everything; 4. Characteristics ascertained by difference from everything; 5. Characteristics ascertained through differing analogies; 6. Characteristics that are not completely true; and 7. Characteristics not from well purified teachings.”
>>> 「若一切法意識所識性，是名一切同類可得相，若一切法相性業法因果異相，由隨如是一一異相，決定展轉各各異相，是名一切異類可得相。善男子！若於此餘同類可得相，及譬喻中有一切異類相者，由此因緣，於所成立非決定故，是名非圓成實相。又於此餘異類可得相，及譬喻中有一切同類相者，由此因緣，於所成立不決定故，亦名非圓成實相。非圓成實故，非善觀察清淨道理，不清淨故，不應修習。若異類譬喻所引相，若非善清淨言教相，當知體性皆不清淨。
<<< “If all dharmas are thought of as being of the nature of consciousness, this is called characteristics ascertained by similitude. If the characteristics, natures, karmic actions, causes, results, and differentiations of all dharmas are thought of according to each of these different characteristics, this is certain to produce more individually different characteristics. This is called characteristics ascertained by difference. Kulaputra! If, in that which is ascertained by similitude, the characteristics different from everything are included by analogy, for this reason, what is proposed cannot be established. This is called characteristics that are not completely true. If, in that which is ascertained by difference from everything, characteristics similar to everything are included by analogy, what is proposed cannot be established. This is also called characteristics that are not completely true. Due to being incomplete, it negates well-understood, purified reasoning. Because impure, it cannot be cultivated. If its characteristics are drawn from dissimilar analogies, if it negates well-purified teaching, you should know, fundamentally it is impure.”

Characteristic 4.7.4
>>> 「法爾道理者，謂如來出世，若不出世，法性，安住、法住，法界，是名法爾道理。
<<< “Logical reasoning according to natural law refers to the Dharmadhatu, which abides in all dharmas and supports the nature of dharmas, whether a Thus Come One appears in the world or not. This is called logical reasoning according to natural law.”

Characteristic 4.8
>>> 「總別者，謂先總說一句法已，後後諸句差別分別究竟顯了。
<<< “Unity and difference refers to the ultimate understanding of what is at first explained generally by a single dharma and later differentiated and distinguished by many terms.”

Characteristic 5
>>> 「自性相者，謂我所說有行有緣，所有能取菩提分法，謂念住等，如是名為彼自性相。
<<< “Characteristics of inherent nature [of the aids to awakening] refer to what I have explained concerning the practices and objects of the aids to awakening, which are the foundations of mindfulness, etc. This is what are known as the characteristics of inherent nature.

Characteristic 6
>>> 「彼果相者，謂若世間若出世間，諸煩惱斷，及所引發世出世間諸果功德，如是名為得彼果相。
<<< “Characteristics of [karmic] results [of the aids to awakening] refer to the abandonment of all mundane and trans-mundane afflictions, and all the mundane and trans-mundane merit resultant therefrom. These are called characteristics of [karmic] results.”

Characteristic 7
>>> 「彼領受開示相者，謂即於彼，以解脫智而領受之，及廣為他宣說開示，如是名為彼領受開示相。
<<< “Characteristics of explanations [of the aids to awakening] refers to experiencing them through liberating wisdom, and then broadly explaining them for others. This is called characteristics of explanations.”

Characteristic 8
>>> 「彼障礙法相者，謂即於修菩提分法，能隨障礙諸染污法，是名彼障礙法相。
<<< “Characteristics of things that obstruct [the aids to awakening] refers to all defiled dharmas that are able to obstruct the cultivation of the aids to awakening. These are called characteristics of things that obstruct [the aids to awakening].”

Characteristic 9
>>> 「彼隨順法相者，謂即於彼多所作法，是名彼隨順法相。
<<< Characteristics of things in accord [with the aids to awakening] refers to things that increase the doing of them. This is called characteristics of things in accord [with the aids to awakening].”

Characteristic 10
>>> 「彼過患相者，當知即彼諸障礙法所有過失，是名彼過患相。
<<< Characteristics harmful [to the aids to awakening], you should know, are the errors of all the things that obstruct them. This is called characteristics harmful [to the aids to awakening].”

Characteristic 11
>>> 「彼勝利相者，當知即彼諸隨順法所有功德，是名彼勝利相。」
<<< Characteristics that benefit [the aids to awakening], you should know, are the merit of all the things in accord with them. This is called the characteristics that benefit [the aids to awakening].”
>>> 曼殊室利菩薩復白佛言：「唯願世尊為諸菩薩略說契經、調伏、本母、不共外道陀羅尼義，由此不共陀羅尼義，令諸菩薩得入如來所說諸法甚深密意。」
<<< Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “Would the World-Honored One please give a general explanation of the unique meaning of the dhāraṇīs on/of/for sutras, vinaya, and the originating mothers, not common to heretics, by which unique dhāraṇī meaning bodhisattvas attain entry into the deepest, underlying (’secret’) meaning of the Dharma expounded by the Thus Come One.”
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！汝今諦聽，吾當為汝略說不共陀羅尼義，令諸菩薩，於我所說密意言詞能善悟入。
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! Listen carefully and I will summarize for you the meaning of the unique dhāraṇīs by which bodhisattvas well penetrate the underlying meaning of what I have explained.”
>>> 「善男子！若雜染法、若清淨法，我說一切皆無作用，亦都無有補特伽羅，以一切種離所為故。非雜染法先染後淨，非清淨法後淨先染，凡夫異生，於麁重身，執著諸法、補特伽羅自性差別，隨眠妄見以為緣故，計我我所；由此妄見，謂我見、我聞、我嗅、我甞、我觸、我知、我食、我作、我染、我淨，如是等類邪加行轉。若有如實知如是者，便能永斷麁重之身，獲得一切煩惱不住，最極清淨，離諸戲論，無為依止，無有加行。善男子！當知是名略說不共陀羅尼義。」
<<< “Kulaputra! Whether defiled dharmas or pure dharmas, I have explained that all are without purpose (function, use, activity), and are also without any pudgala, for everything is apart from
conditionality. There are no defiled dharmas, for it is not the case that they are first defiled and then purified. There are no pure dharmas, for it is not the case that what is later purified was previously defiled. Common people in their ‘coarse heavy’ bodies cling to dharmas and are passionate in regard to their false views, differentiating the inherent nature of a pudgala, they imagine an ‘I’ and a ‘mine.’ Due to this false view they say, ‘I see,’ ‘I hear,’ ‘I smell,’ ‘I taste,’ ‘I touch,’ ‘I know,’ ‘I eat,’ ‘I do,’
‘I am defiled,’ ‘I am purified.’ Like this, their perverse efforts persevere (prayoga). But if they knew things as they really are, then they would be able finally to abandon those ‘coarse heavy’ bodies and attain the unconditioned support that does not abide in afflictions, the highest purity apart from all verbal fabrication, and the unconditioned support without any persevering. Kulaputra! You should know, this is called a summary explanation of the meaning of unique dhāraṇīs.”
>>> 爾時，世尊欲重宣此義，而說頌曰：
<<< At that time, the World-Honored One, wanting to emphasize the meaning of this, spoke in verse saying:
>>> 一切雜染清淨法，　　
皆無作用數取趣。　
由我宣說離所為，　　
染污清淨非先後。
<<< All defiled and pure dharmas,
Are completely without function or repeated incarnations (pudgala).
As I explain, [everything is] apart from conditionality,
Defilement and purity are without before or after.
>>> 於麁重身隨眠見，　　
為緣計我及我所；　
由此妄謂我見等，　　
我食我為我染淨。
<<< From the ‘coarse heaviness’ of the body follow stupefied views,
Imagining an “I” and a “mine.”
From this delusion of the view of a self, etc.
[They say] “I eat,” “I do,” “I am defiled or pure.”
>>> 若如實知如是者，　　
乃能永斷麁重身，　
得無染淨無戲論，　　
無為依止無加行。」
<<< If one knows [things] as they really are,
And forever cuts off the ‘coarse heaviness’ of the body,
Attaining the unconditioned support apart from defilement or purification,
without verbal fabrication, without effort.
>>> 爾時，曼殊室利菩薩摩訶薩復白佛言：「世尊！云何應知諸如來心生起之相？」
<<< At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva mahasattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! What should be understood as the characteristic of the arising of the mind of the Thus Come One?”
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！夫如來者，非心意識生起所顯，然諸如來有無加行心法生起，當知此事猶如變化。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! A Thus Come One is not to be described as having mind, thought, or consciousness that arises. Rather, Thus Come Ones all arise from mental states without perseverance (i.e. effortlessness). You should know, they are like illusory transformations.”
>>> 曼殊室利菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！若諸如來法身，遠離一切加行；既無加行，云何而有心法生起？」
<<< Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva mahasattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! If the Dharma Body of all Thus Come Ones is apart from all effort (prayoga), being without effort, how does [such a] mental state arise?”
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！先所修習方便般若加行力故，有心生起。善男子！譬如正入無心睡眠，非於覺悟而作加行，由先所作加行勢力而復覺悟。又如正在滅盡定中，非於起定而作加行，由先所作加行勢力，還從定起。如從睡眠及滅盡定心更生起，如是如來由先修習方便般若加行力故，當知復有心法生起。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! Due to the power of the effort whereby they have previously cultivated the prajñā of upaya, there is the arising of mind. Kulaputra! It is just as one needs no effort to wake up after a deep, thoughtless sleep, for one awakens because of the power of efforts previously expended. Or, it is like needing no effort to arise from correct cessative concentration, for one returns because of the power of previous efforts. Just as one produces thoughts when arising from sleep or cessative concentration, you should know, like this, a Thus Come One gives rise to thoughts because of the power of the prajñā of upaya previously cultivated.”
>>> 曼殊室利菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如來化身，當言有心為無心耶？」
<<< Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! Should the transformation body of a Thus Come One be said to have mind, or be without mind?”
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！非是有心，亦非無心。何以故？無自依心故，有依他心故。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! It is not that there is mind, and also not without mind. How so? Due to being without an independent mind, and there being mind dependent upon others.”
>>> 曼殊室利菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如來所行，如來境界，此之二種，有何差別？」
<<< Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! The [sphere of] activity of the Thus Come One and the realm of the Thus Come One - what is the difference between these two?”
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！如來所行，謂一切種，如來共有不可思議無量功德，眾所莊嚴清淨佛土。如來境界，謂一切種，五界差別。何等為五？一者、有情界；二者、世界；三者、法界；四者、調伏界；五者、調伏方便界。如是名為二種差別。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! The [sphere of] activity of the Thus Come One refers to all kinds of pure Buddha Lands adorned with inconceivable, immeasurable merit, common to all Thus Come Ones. The realm of the Thus Come One refers to five different kinds of realms. What five? 1. The realm of sentient beings; 2. Worldly realms; 3. The Dharma Realm; 4. The realm of Discipline; and 5. The realm of disciplinary upaya. These are the differences between those two.”
>>> 曼殊室利菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如來成等正覺、轉正法輪、入大涅槃，如是三種，當知何相？」
<<< Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! What should be known as the characteristics of the Thus Come Ones correct awakening, turning of the wheel of the Correct Dharma, and entrance into the great Nirvana?”
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！當知此三皆無二相。謂非成等正覺、非不成等正覺；非轉正法輪、非不轉正法輪；非入大涅槃、非不入大涅槃。何以故？如來法身究竟淨故，如來化身常示現故。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! You should know, these three are characterized as being non-dual. Which is to say, there is no development of correct awakening, nor is there no development of correct awakening; There is no turning of the wheel of the Correct Dharma, nor is there not a turning of the wheel of the Correct Dharma; There is no entering the great Nirvana, nor is there no entering the great Nirvana. How so? Because of the ultimate purity of the Dharma Body of the Thus Come One, and because of the constant manifestation of the Thus Come One.”
>>> 曼殊室利菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！諸有情類，但於化身見聞奉事生諸功德，如來於彼有何因緣？」
<<< Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! All kinds of sentient beings give rise to merit just from seeing, hearing, and making offerings to transformational bodies. How does the Thus Come One cause them [to do so]?”
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！如來是彼增上所緣之因緣故。又彼化身，是如來力所住持故。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! It is because the Thus Come One is the dominant condition for them. Also, because those transformational bodies are sustained through the power of the Thus Come One.”
>>> 曼殊室利菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！等無加行，何因緣故如來法身，為諸有情放大智光，及出無量化身影像？聲聞、獨覺解脫之身，無如是事？」
<<< Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! How does the Dharma Body of the Thus Come One, without any effort, emit the great Light of Knowledge for all sentient beings, and produce the images of immeasurable transformational bodies? Why do the liberation bodies of voice-hearers and solitary awakened ones not ‘do things’ like this?”
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！譬如等無加行，從日、月輪水火二種頗胝迦寶放大光明，非餘水火頗胝迦寶，謂大威德有情所住持故，諸有情業增上力故。又如從彼善工業者之所雕飾，末尼寶珠出印文像，不從所餘不雕飾者。如是緣於無量法界方便般若，極善修習磨瑩，集成如來法身，從是能放大智光明及出種種化身影像，非唯從彼解脫之身，有如斯事。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! It is just like how, without effort, light is emitted from the sun and moon, and the two kinds of water and fire sphaṭika jewels, not other water and fire sphaṭika jewels, because they are sustained by sentient beings of great, magnanimous merit, and because the the karma of all sentient beings is the dominant power. It is also like the karma of a carving done by a skilled craftsperson, whose maṇi jewel pearls emit the images inscribed, but not from those not carved so. From conditions like this, through the extremely skillful cultivation and refinement of Prajñā and Upāya throughout the immeasurable Dharma Realm, the Dharma Body of Thus Come One comes together, and from this is able to cast the great light of knowledge and emit the images of all kinds of transformational bodies, but not from those liberation bodies alone are there such ‘things’.
>>> 曼殊室利菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！如世尊說：『如來、菩薩威德住持，令諸眾生於欲界中，生剎帝利、婆羅門等大富貴家，人身財寶無不圓滿，或欲界天、色、無色界，一切身財圓滿可得。』世尊！此中有何密意？」
<<< Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! As the World-Honored One has said, ‘The sustaining righteousness of Tathagatas and bodhisattvas causes sentient beings in the Realm of Desire to be born among noble families of warriors and brahmins, their physical and material well-being lacking nothing, whether in the form of gods in the Realm of Desire, the Realm of Form, or the Formless Realm, they are able to attain perfection in their physical and material wellbeing.’ World-Honored One! What is the underlying (secret) meaning of this?”
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！如來、菩薩威德住持，若道若行，於一切處，能令眾生獲得身財皆圓滿者，即隨所應，為彼宣說此道此行。若有能於此道此行正修行者，於一切處所獲身財無不圓滿。若有眾生於此道行違背輕毀，又於我所起損惱心及瞋恚心，命終已後，於一切處所得身財無不下劣。曼殊室利！由是因緣，當知如來及諸菩薩威德住持，非但能令身財圓滿，如來、菩薩住持威德，亦令眾生身財下劣。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! The sustaining righteousness of Tathagatas and bodhisattvas, whether in terms of the Path or practice, is capable of leading sentient beings in all places to obtain perfection in their physical and material well-being. As appropriate, they preach the Path and its practice. Those who are able to, and actually do, correctly cultivate the Path and the practice will never lack for such perfection of their physical and material well-being. But for sentient beings who turn away from and reject the Path and its practice, and harbor thoughts of bitterness or anger, after their lives are over the physicality and material [well-being] they may have had will dwindle. Mañjuśrī! From these causes and conditions, you should know, not only that the righteous Tathagatas and bodhisattvas bring about physical and material well-being, but also how the dwindling of the body and riches comes about for sentient beings.”
>>> 曼殊室利菩薩復白佛言：「世尊！諸穢土中，何事易得？何事難得？諸淨土中，何事易得？何事難得？」
<<< Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva again addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! In all defiled lands,  what are those things easy to find? What are those things difficult to find? In all pure lands, what are those things easy to find? What are those things difficult to find?
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！諸穢土中，八事易得，二事難得。何等名為八事易得？一者、外道；二者、有苦眾生；三者、種姓家世興衰差別；四者、行諸惡行；五者、毀犯尸羅；六者、惡趣；七者、下乘；八者、下劣意樂加行菩薩。何等名為二事難得？一者、增上意樂加行菩薩之所遊集，二者、如來出現于世。曼殊室利！諸淨土中與上相違，當知八事甚為難得，二事易得。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! In all defiled lands there are eight things easy to find and two things difficult to find. What are the eight things easy to find? 1. Outside ways (’heretics’); 2. Suffering sentient beings; 3. Differences in the rising and falling of houses of high lineage in the world; 4. The doing of evil actions; 5. The transgressing of śīla; 6. Evil rebirths; 7. The lesser vehicle(s); and 8. Bodhisattvas with inferior intentions and effort. What are the two things difficult to find? 1. An assembly of bodhisattvas with superior intentions and effort; and 2. The appearance of a Thus Come One in the world. Mañjuśrī! In pure lands, it is the exact opposite. You should know, those eight things are hard to find, and those two things are easy to find.”
>>> 爾時，曼殊室利菩薩白佛言：「世尊！於此解深密法門中，此名何教？我當云何奉持？」
<<< At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva addressed the Buddha saying, “World-Honored One! How should this Revealing the Secret Dharma Door be taught? How should we revere it?”
>>> 佛告曼殊室利菩薩曰：「善男子！此名如來成所作事了義之教，於此如來成所作事了義之教，汝當奉持。」
<<< The Buddha replied to Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva saying, “Kulaputra! This is taught as the explicit meaning of the ’doings’ of the Thus Come One. You should revere it as the teaching on the explicit meaning of the ’doings’ of the Thus Come One”
>>> 說是如來成所作事了義教時，於大會中有七十五千菩薩摩訶薩，皆得圓滿法身證覺。
<<< When this explicit meaning of the ’doings’ of the Thus Come One was spoken among the great assembly, there were seventy-five thousand great bodhisattvas who all realized the perfected the Dharma Body.

